Annual Fee to Rise $49; Legal Aid Gets BoostJohn Flynn RooneyOctober 4, 2002The Illinois Supreme Court on Friday hiked attorney registrationfees by $49 a year to boost both legal aid services and support forlawyers with drug and alcohol problems. Under the high court'sorder, the base annual fee for active lawyers rises to $229 as ofJan. 1. Last year, the high court raised that fee to $180 from$140. Lawyers in their first three years of practice or who areinactive but wish to remain on the roll of attorneys pay $90.Most of the latest increase -- $42 -- will go to the LawyersTrust Fund of Illinois, which disburses monies to legal aidorganizations that assist low- income residents in civil matters.The other $7 will go the Lawyers' Assistance Program Inc., whichhelps lawyers overcome drug or alcohol addiction and mentalillness.The Lawyers Trust Fund and LAP aim, respectively, to improvelegal services to the poor to provide equal justice under the law,and to increase public confidence in the administration of justice,Chief Justice Mary Ann G. McMorrow said."These two separate increases in the fees lawyers pay is a stepcloser to achieving those two goals," McMorrow said in writtenstatement. "In times of a downturn in the economy, they demonstratea commitment by the full court, and by attorneys in Illinois, toassume responsibility for those unable to afford legal services andfor those lawyers who need compassion and help."There are now more than 57,000 active attorneys in Illinois.The fee increase is expected to generate $2.4 million for theLawyers Trust Fund and more than $400,000 for LAP, to provideadditional staff and resources.The Lawyers Trust Fund administers the high court's Interest onLawyer Trust Accounts, or IOLTA, a program that pools clients'money, escrow funds, for instance, and that in turn generatesincome for the trust fund.But low interest rates and a sagging economy have plagued theprogram. The deposits earned 2.5 percent in interest a year ago andnow average 0.65 percent, according to Ruth Ann Schmitt, executivedirector of the Lawyers Trust Fund.As a result, funding available for the legal aid groups hasplummeted by more than 50 percent, from $3.7 million a year ago to$1.5 million this year, according to Schmitt. The Supreme Court'saction raising the fee "is lifesaving for our grantees," Schmittsaid Friday.The Lawyers Trust Fund helps underwrite operations at 34 legalagencies throughout the state, including the Legal AssistanceFoundation of Metropolitan Chicago, Land of Lincoln LegalAssistance Foundation Inc., based in Springfield, and Prairie StateLegal Services, based in Rockford."This is a big step the Supreme Court has taken in demonstratingfor all attorneys in the state how important it is that lawyers bemade aware of their responsibilities to try to ensure legalservices for all," Leonard F. Amari, a past president of theIllinois State Bar Association and chair of the Lawyers Trust Fund,said in a press release.The fee increase is "an important step that will give lawyersand judges an opportunity to fully recover from substance abuse andmental illness so that they can perform their jobs to the best oftheir ability, thereby assisting the citizens of Illinois," SheilaM. Murphy, a former Cook County Circuit Court judge who is LAP'spresident, said in the release. More than two years ago, the highcourt established a special committee on lawyer assistanceprograms, chaired by Timothy L. Bertschy, a Peoria lawyer andformer ISBA president. The committee urged the justices to provideadditional resources for such programs in Illinois throughincreased registration fees."There are going to be some lawyers I suspect who are going toobject to the increase, but the recommendation made to the SupremeCourt regarding the fee increase had broad support from barassociations across the state," Bertschy said in the release.LAP has helped lawyers facing personal crises for more than 20years. The additional revenue generated by the fee hike will allowLAP to establish offices in central and southern Illinois andexpand its outreach in law schools, according to Murphy. She addedthat the additional funding also will allow LAP to help more withrelapse treatment and following up with lawyers who have completedthe program.LAP's current funding primarily comes from the state's twolargest bar associations and private donations.The high court's order Friday amends Supreme Court Rules 751 and756, authorizing the Attorney Registration and DisciplinaryCommission to collect and automatically pass along fees to theLawyers Trust Fund and Lawyers' Assistance Program Fund. The latteris a special state treasury account created at the high court'srequest and allowed for under legislation enacted earlier thisyear.