Atlanta Journal-ConstitutionBarnes' new job will improve justice for poorBY MAURICIO VIVERO Friday, January 10, 2003On Monday, departing Gov. Roy Barnes will spend his first day asa private citizen by starting his new job as a full-time, pro-bono(unpaid) lawyer at the Atlanta Legal Aid Society.The decision by Barnes, the most improbable casualty of ElectionDay 2002, to go to work for legal aid was almost as unexpected ashis November defeat. As a legal services attorney, Barnes will helpwomen escape domestic violence, Mauricio Viverois vice presidentseniors fight predatory lending scams and parents obtain childsupport for their kids. of LegalIn doing so, he will take his place on the front line of theU.S. legal community's Services Corporation, theuphill and underpublicized struggle to achieve equal access tojustice for millions of Washington-Americans too poor to affordlegal representation. based nonprofitcorporationchartered byThe inaccessibility of the U.S. civil justice system is hardly anew development, but it Congress intook Barnes' decision to put the national media spotlight on ourcountry's ongoing 1974 to promote equal access toaccess-to-justice crisis. civil justice.The 2000 U.S. census reports that more than 43 million Americansqualify for free federally funded legal assistance, yet fewer than20 percent of eligible clients (annual income: $11,075 or less) areable to obtain legal help when they need it, according to theAmerican Bar Association. In Georgia, there is just one legal aidlawyer for every 10,500 eligible poor people.Barnes understood this problem long before he became governor.While in private practice, he handled many pro-bono cases and was afrequent volunteer in the Cobb County office of the federallyfunded Atlanta Legal Aid Society. Most memorably, he secured a $115million judgment in 1993 against Fleet Finance for victimizing18,000 homeowners -- many of them senior citizens -- with itswidespread predatory lending mortgage practices.His long-standing commitment to the underserved is certainlyadmirable, but it should not be viewed as a rare and laudable actof civic virtue. To be admitted to practice law, every attorneymust take a professional oath to promote justice -- and everystate's ethical rules include language indicating lawyers'responsibility to be guardians of fair play for those living inpoverty.In Georgia, many law firms, corporations and private attorneysare working pro bono to serve the neediest clients. Yet only 23percent of the state's 23,598 active lawyers reported meeting theGeorgia State Bar's goal of 50 hours of pro-bono service in2002.The need for volunteers is most severe outside the five-countyAtlanta metropolitan area, where 70 percent of the state's poorpeople are served by only 24 percent of the state's lawyers.National pro-bono participation is even worse. Only 23 percentof the roughly 1 million attorneys in America volunteer even onehour of pro-bono service annually, according to the ABA.Shamefully, over the last decade, the average revenue of thecountry's most successful law firms has increased by more than 50percent while pro- bono hours have dropped by one-third.Barnes knows these statistics help explain the unflatteringpublic image of the legal profession. Speaking to University ofGeorgia School of Law graduates at their 2000 commencement, hesaid, "The cold, hard reality is that far too many people face thepossibility of an unjust outcome because they must navigate anoften complicated legal system without the benefit of competentcounsel. Why? Because competent lawyers in the corporate practicedon't want to get involved. They don't have the time. They have toomany hours to bill."Sometimes, it seems, we forget that "justice for all" is part ofour national creed. I, for one, will not forget President Bush'spoignant reminder in the aftermath of Sept. 11: "We're in a fightfor our principles," he told us, "and our first responsibility isto live by them."Our democracy will suffer greatly if so many of our nation'spoor continue to be priced out of the justice system. Lawyers inGeorgia and across the country must follow Barnes' lead -- ormillions of people will continue to arrive at the courthouse doorto find they cannot afford the price of admission.Mauricio Vivero is vice president of Legal Services Corporation,the Washington-based nonprofit corporation chartered by Congress in1974 to promote equal access to civil justice.