United States General Accounting OfficeOffice of Special InvestigationsGAOFebruary 2001ELECTRONIC LAW ENFORCEMENTIntroduction to Investigations in an ElectronicEnvironmentContains Sensitive Law Enforcement Information: Not forDistribution Outside Federal Law Enforcement EntitiesGAO-01-121GUnited States General Accounting Office Office of SpecialInvestigations Washington, DC 20548February 2001Electronic Law Enforcement: Introduction to Investigations in anElectronic Environment is published as a service to the federal lawenforcement community by GAO. The guide contains sensitiveinformation and is not for distribution outside federal lawenforcement organizations. The guide is comprised primarily ofresources available from various law enforcement organizations. Itis intended to be a useful aid for criminal investigators bydiscussing the various tools and other resources available forassisting investigations involving electronic evidence.Chapters 1, 2, and 3 discuss the conduct of an investigation inan electronic environment:investigating illegal online activity,the Internet as an investigative tool, andsearch and seizure methods involving electronicevidence.Chapter 4 discusses impediments to electronic investigationsposed bycryptography and encryption andthe anonymity that the Internet can provide.The guide's appendixes augment these areas by citing applicablestatutes (app. I); by providing links to selected Internetresources (app. II); and by discussing basic cryptography andencryption (app. III), digital signature and public-keyinfrastructure (app. IV), and biometrics as an identification andauthentication technology (app. V). We hope that the glossary ofterms will provide a useful reminder of related items as theyreappear in the guide's discussions and in the criminalinvestigator's work.The information provided in this guide is current as of the dateof this publication. It is intended both as an introduction for thecriminal investigator concerning issues of electronic evidence andas an aid for the investigator in developing basic investigativestrategies. We are providing the guide in hard copy and on acompact disk (CD) for agency duplication as needed. However, pleasedo not release the document or the CD outside the federal lawenforcement community. If you wish to access the encrypted guide onGAO's Web site, please send your request via e-mail todigitalguide@gao.gov. We will assess your request and inform you ofhow access will be provided. The guide is also available in anencrypted format at the Cybercop Secure Communities VPN, a secureWeb site which is a joint project of Cybercop.org and the ESP Groupat https://cybercop.esportals.com.We wish to acknowledge the significant assistance provided byothers to the development of this guide. Chief among these wereKevin Manson, Instructor, Financial Fraud Institute, Federal LawEnforcement Training Center; the Small Business Administration'sCounsel to the Inspector General; and special agents of theNational Aeronautics and Space Administration; the U.S. Attorney'sOffice, Southern District of New York; the Federal Bureau ofInvestigation; and the Department of the Treasury, Office of theInspector General for Tax Administration.We request your assistance in periodically updating andimproving the guide. Please submit updates and suggestions on howto better meet users' needs to the e-mail address above or by faxto (202) 512-3086. You may also write to us at the Office ofSpecial Investigations, U.S. General Accounting Office, 441 G.Street NW, Suite 6K17S, Washington D.C. 20548-4243. Robyn D.Stewart, M. Jane Hunt, and Keith A. Rhodes were key contributors tothe guide.Robert H. Hast Managing Director Office of SpecialInvestigationsTo Gain Access to the GuideIf you wish to access the encrypted guide, as stated in thepreceding letter, send your e-mail request to digitalguide@gao.gov.Include your name, law enforcement affiliation, and officetelephone number in the request. We will assess your request andinform you of how access will be provided.