Legal Aid to highlight Senior DayRichard Ingham"But it's like trying to tell a stranger about rock 'n'roll."-John SebastianIt's just this hard when I try to answer the question: Why doolder Oklahomans need lawyers? The answers are important enoughthat they will be a discussion topic of this year's Senior Day at9a.m. March 25 in the House Chamber at the Capitol. The followingis a preview of some of the answers for review:We can all agree that older Oklahomans need medical care. Buteven the best care is worthless if an older patient can't drive tothe doctor for ongoing treatment because his or her car has beenwrongfully seized in a debt dispute. Therefore, lawyers are part ofthe prescription for regular medical care for many of the 600,000Oklahomans age 60 and older.Another example: if a doctor treats an elderly patient for alung ailment, the doctor's treatment will be undone and he will seethe patient again and again, if the patient is sent home to anunheated apartment. Lawyers know how to make landlords heatapartments so the medical treatment can stick. (By the way, a May16, 2001, article in The New York Times reports on a program atBoston Medical Center providing a walk-in legal clinic in thehospital to help fight their patients' legal and administrativebattles.)We also can agree that older Oklahomans - like all citizens -have rights to control their health care until they becomeincapacitated or these rights are transferred to another by legaldocument or process. "Old" is not a legal classification thatresults in automatic loss of these rights. Moreover, having an oldparent does not automatically confer on children the right to makethe parents' health care choices.It follows that an important role lawyers provide for agingOklahomans is not only to create rights - transferring documentssuch as durable powers of attorney and guardianship orders, butalso to monitor their use. In family situations, for example,lawyers must ensure that powers of attorney and guardianships areused to serve only the person transferring or losing rights. Theyare not to be used to help a family "manage" their mother or help adoctor or nursing home get permission for a pill or procedure theyfeel is in the best interest of a patient. Good news: Oklahoma nowhas a Public Guardianship Program, albeit unfunded, that willsupply lawyers to perform this rights-monitoring processOklahoma grandparents should be able to enjoy theirgrandchildren, not raise them. But owing to the social problems ofdivorce and drug use, grandparents are increasingly being called onto raise their grandchildren because of missing parents. Adding tothe physical, emotional and financial burden they take on,grandparents face legal problems.All the decisions parents made without a second thought nowrequire evidence of legal authority when made by grandparents.Grandparents can't get shots for their grandchildren, enroll themin school or sign field trip permission slips unless they can proveby legal document that rights that lie naturally in the parentshave been transferred to them. This requires lawyers to helpgrandparents with durable powers of attorney, guardianships,custody and sometimes adoption.Lawyers are also needed to make the system work. Our judicialsystem works well only when both sides have lawyers. Effectiverepresentation should not be an accident of geography, economicstatus or age.The attorneys needed to meet these challenges now are beingsupplied in part by Legal Aid Services of Oklahoma (LASO) undercontract with 11 area agencies on aging covering the state. Theseservices, subject to certain limitations on types of cases, arefree to those 60 and older.To help put a face on the legal needs of older Oklahomans, eachperson attending Senior Day on March 25 will receive a compilationof more than 50 stories written by LASO attorneys and paralegalsabout how they have improved the lives of older Oklahomans.Richard Ingham, state legal services developer, can be reachedat 522-3069 or mailto:richard.ingham@okdhs.org