Vacaville ReporterLibrary LawyersProgram provides many with legal adviceBy Darryl RichardsonMonday, December 16, 2002When Shane Massello realized his former landlord was not goingto return a security deposit he believed he was entitled to, hisfirst thought was to go to court for the money. The amountinvolved, however, was not enough to justify bringing in a lawyerand Massello didn't know how to begin a case in small claims court.Program InformationInterested in free legal advice through the program? Arrive atthe Vacaville library, 1020 Ulatis Drive, at 4 p.m. on thefollowing dates: April 23, May 7, May 21, June 4 or June18. Appointments will be taken at 4:05 p.m. The attorney visitswill begin at 6 p.m and last until 8 p.m.Fortunately for Massello and other local people with similarproblems, the Vacaville Public Library has a new program designedto assist people with legal questions. The Lawyer in the Libraryprogram is an offshoot of a long-standing program at the Vallejolibrary, which has proven to be very effective in providing peoplewith free, unbiased advice. The Vacaville program kicked off inMarch and has proven to be so popular during its first two sessionsthat it has already expanded from one meeting per month to two."I knew about the Vallejo program and wanted to see if it wouldwork here," said Dick Brownell, who is coordinating the program forthe library. "I knew there would be some demand for this, but I wasreally pleased with the turnout for the first two sessions."Because the program is just starting in Vacaville, only twoattorneys are available during the two-hour sessions. Those wishingto speak to the attorneys are allowed up to 20 minutes to discusstheir cases and receive advice on how to proceed."Basically I just shoot them in the right direction," said GeneWindham, a Vacaville attorney specializing in probate and tax lawwho helped out earlier this week. "Sometimes the case is outsideour areas, but we can at least give them some clues on if they havea case and how to go from here."Brownell said the first two programs have featured questions onalmost every type of legal problem imaginable."We have seen conflicts with neighbors, family law issues,immigration and financial problems," he said. "All kinds of thingsyou don't need to go to court to resolve."Most of the people attending the most recent session said theywere simply looking for advice on whether they have a legal caseand how to proceed from here."I'm here to get advice because I don't know what to do next,"said Charlene Jerrell of Suisun, who was seeking help with afinancial issue. "I like the fact that I can find out what is andisn't available for me. The fact that an attorney will talk to meand I can ask them questions is great."Part of the agreement the participants must sign before meetingwith the attorney is that the attorney is not able to serve as theperson's lawyer during any action in the matter. This fact is veryimportant to many of the participants, includ ing Massello."It's a tremendous help," he said. "They are simply answeringquestions without thinking of how they can make money. It's nice tonot have to worry about seeing a biased attorney."After a 10-minute meeting with Windham, Massello said thediscussion was everything he hoped for."It was excellent," he said. "I wanted to get some informationon how to continue and I got more than I was expecting. It soundslike we will be able to get everything we want and then some and ifthe judge is in a good mood, we might get even more!" Because theVacaville program is just starting up, Brownell said the number ofpeople who can be seen each night is small, but plans are alreadyin place to increase the totals. "Because we only have twoattorneys per night right now, we can only see about 15 people eachnight," he said. "The Vallejo program has four attorneys eachnight, so they can see more people. It's too early to tell, but Ithink we will likely have another attorney here soon."Brownell also said a partnership with the Solano County BarAssociation should help get the word out to attorneys who mightwant to donate their time."This is a pure pro-bono project," Brownell said. "We reallycommend them for coming in during the evening and helping out."The initial demand for legal services was what prompted Brownellto add a second session each month. He said the plan is to hold theevent on the first and third Tuesdays of each month, but theschedule is somewhat different for the next several months. Thenext sessions will be held on April 23, May 7 and 21 and June 4 and18.