Chicago Daily Law BulletinNew Online Resources Available to Legal Aid AttorneysAdam W. LaskerOctober 1, 2002A local technology center has opened the doors to a statewideInternet community for legal aid providers and pro bonoattorneys.The Illinois Technology Center for Law & the Public Interestlaunched two new Web sites Tuesday that will allow the state'slegal services agencies to swap training information, to maintainindividual listings of services and volunteer opportunities and toschedule events on an electronic calendar.The ITC, housed in Chicago-Kent College of Law and funded inlarge part by the Chicago Bar Foundation, the Lawyers Trust Fund ofIllinois and Legal Services Corp. in Washington, D.C., developedthe online community in what is promised to be a userfriendlyenvironment."We are replacing the older test site with two dynamicdatabase-driven Web sites ... with content-management systemsoftware," said ITC Executive Director Lisa A. Colpoys. "It soundscomplex," she added, "but it really allows nontechnical people likeme and other lawyers to add content directly to the Web sites sothey become a legal aid community online."Contributors need only be able to use Internet browsers andbasic word processing and email programs, Colpoys said.The sites, www.illinoislegalaid.org and www.illinoisprobono.org,include a list of more than 90 state agencies, most of whichprovide direct legal services to indigent clients. Staff members atthose agencies can update the online information about the servicesthey provide and they can add to an electronic library of legalinformation in 12 different practice areas -- without leaving theiroffices."We're really relying on our legal aid partners across the stateto build this legal-services library," Colpoys said. "Each practicearea contains information for attorneys to learn about that area oflaw so they can get training or support ... without having to go tothe [actual] library."The ITC has enlisted legal services attorneys from across thestate to manage each of the 12 categories, and those volunteerswill organize contributions and add them to a searchabledatabase.Private practice attorneys looking for pro bono work can visitthe illinoisprobono.org Web site, which has a list of volunteeropportunities from each of the agencies. The attorneys can searchthrough that listbased on criteria including the location where thework needs to be done and the field of law in which itconcentrates."It's providing an avenue for increasing communication throughlegal interest groups, and the organizations really have anopportunity to reach out to the general legal community by postingvolunteer opportunities," Colpoys said.Anne Stalder Nelson, executive director of the Cabrini GreenLegal Aid Clinic in Chicago, said the Web sites will serve as aresource that previously would have come at significant cost."As the director of a small legal aid clinic, this is huge forus -- it's giving us access to resources we wouldn't otherwise beable to afford," Nelson said. "It's coordinating legal services inIllinois in a way that hasn't ever been done before."She expects the Web sites will help promote smaller legal aidproviders among the general legal community, which will helpattract more volunteer attorneys. Nelson, a member of the ITC Boardof Directors, also said the available training materials, theonline calendar and the message boards will save a lot of time ingetting new interns and volunteers up to speed."To the small legal aid providers, it helps us do our jobs muchbetter so we can spend more of our time doing what's important,"Nelson said.ITC board member Robert A. Glaves is the executive director ofthe Chicago Bar Foundation, which provides funding to more than 40local legal aid agencies, and he said the Web sites will help thoseagencies run more efficiently."It's going to reduce the duplication of efforts and it's goingto increase efficiency by increasing the communication among peopledoing similar work," he said. "The collective knowledge comestogether and saves them time that they can spend on theircases."