New funding sources sought for Foundation President asksbusinesses to donateBy Mike FimeaArizona Business GazetteJan. 31, 2002Mark Rubin thinks the Arizona Bar Foundation should look beyondthe law officefor financial support."We hear from a lot of people who don't believe the governmentshould provide legal services," said Rubin, who began his one-yearterm as foundation president in January. "I want to challenge themto see what they can provide. The business community could deliverfunds and help with real needs. The people who use legal servicesare good people who are just down on their luck."The Bar Foundation funds legal aid for the poor and educationalprograms at schools. Its budget comes from lawyer contributions,grants and interest from lawyers' trust accounts, For 2002, thefoundation awarded nearly $950,000 to 11 agencies (see sidebar).Rubin, a sole practitioner in Tucson, says the foundation has"quietly done a fabulous job" at legal services and civicsinstruction. Where it's fallen short is in getting its messageacross."We haven't been as good at communicating our story," hesaid."We provide services to students all over the state, and Bosniahas sent delegations to Arizona to learn how our justice systemworks. You can't have a democracy without also having a place toresolve disputes."As he begins his term, Rubin faces an altered funding landscapefor the state's three primary legal-aid agencies: Community LegalServices in Phoenix, Southern Arizona Legal Aid in Tucson andDNA-People's Legal Services in Flagstaff. The Arizona Equal JusticeCampaign has secured a three-year, $1.4 million commitment througha campaign that asks Arizona Bar members to contribute theequivalent of two billable hours annually."We're friendly competitors. I've made my two-hour pledge,"Rubin said. The difference is that besides the "big three," thefoundation also gives money to smaller agencies like CatholicSocial Services and the Southern Arizona People's Law Center. "Wealso fund a program at the ASU law school where students help thehomeless get reacquainted with the legal aspects of society," Rubinsaid. "The students show them how to get a driver's license or dealwith income taxes, things that we take for granted." Rubin has heldnearly every position within the foundation - treasurer, secretary,president-elect - since joining its board of directors in 1996. Hehas watched as the trustaccount fund has swelled and contracted, depending on thepricing whims of the state's banks.In 2000, for example, the foundation awarded $788,000 in grants- a drop of nearly $200,000 - because banks reduced the interestrates paid on lawyers' trust accounts. Funding has returned to thepre-2000 level, for which Rubin credits former foundation PresidentDavid Gaona."David did a tremendous job," Rubin said. "He'd meet with thebanks and after his meetings, the rates would go up."Rubin doesn't expect interest rates on the trust accounts tosuddenly increase - "the highest rates today are less than theywere 10 years ago; that's the economy" - but he said the foundationmust continue to advocate its cause."The funds we get from banks reflect a decision to part withmoney that they could use for other purposes," he said. "We have tomake the case that our mission is important to them."Besides his legal career, Rubin is the founder of an onlinebookstore (lawyerbriefs.com) that reviews law-based novels. Thesite lists about 600 titles from the past 20 years, with reviews ofabout one-third of the books.John Lescroart and William Lashner are among Rubin's favoritewriters; he is less enamored of John Grisham."My purpose is to see if these authors stay reasonably true tothe law and don't get too fanciful," he said. "It's a hobby thatdoesn't get too much time these days."When he looks back a year from now, Rubin said he hopes thefoundation has new programs, a higher profile and a rejuvenatedboard."I want to leave knowing I started us on the road to bigger andbetter things," he said.