'Justice Center' for County's PoorCommunity: The group wants to share space withother agencies providing legal help and basicservices.By JOSE CARDENAS TIMES STAFF WRITERDecember 9 2001California Rural Legal Assistance has purchased an Oxnardbuilding it had been renting since earlier this year, moving theprovider of legal services for Ventura County's poor closer to twogoals.The purchase will help meet the organization's long-term plan ofestablishing a one-stop "justice center" for agencies that provideservices to the poor.It also will allow the organization to house in one building itsmigrant-worker legal assistance program and a newer basic servicesprogram. The two programs are currently housed in buildings about ablock apart. The organization's Oxnard office broadened itsservices from farm worker-related aid to basic assistance last yearwhen the federal government chose to fund it, over Channel CountiesLegal Services, as the county's sole provider of legal help to thepoor.The migrant program generally has taken on issues related tofarm labor and has represented large groups of workers. The basicprogram represents individuals on cases involving labor, housingand claims for public benefits.The purchase of the building on A Street in downtown Oxnard alsosignals California Rural Legal Assistance's intention to establishroots, said its leaders."To me, it symbolizes a long-term presence in the community,"said Santos Gomez, directing attorney of the organization's migrantservices office. "We want the community to know that we arecommitted to try to address social injustice."The building will be named the Cruz Reynoso Justice Center. Itwill be the first building anywhere to be named after the firstLatino to serve on the California Supreme Court.Naming the building after Reynoso seemed appropriate because theformer justice came from a farm worker family that toiled in fieldsfrom Orange County to the Central Valley, said Jose Padilla, thegroup's statewide director."It's a great honor to have a building dedicated to justice andto the service of the community . . . named after me," saidReynoso, who is now a UC Davis Law School professor. "Those are theissues I have devoted my life to.California Rural Legal Assistance has provided legal services tofarm workers and other poor people statewide for 35 years. ItsOxnard office has provided services exclusively to farm workers formore than a decade.The organization raised about $60,000 to purchase the A Streetbuilding. Half the money was raised from local donors, includingfarm workers."We wanted to show that we were a part of the community and thatthey were a part of us," Padilla said. "How do you developownership if not through a project that required localfunding?"But the main funding comes from a $650,000 loan the statewideorganization took out. Padilla said the organization plans to keepraising money locally to help pay the mortgage.The building also houses five businesses that were alreadytenants. The organization's migrant program will move in, and theorganization will spend the next year looking for nonprofit groupsor businesses to make up the rest of the justice center.The idea is to bring together organizations that provideservices "consistent with CRLA's mission to alleviate poverty andto empower communities," said Gomez. He has already beguncontacting groups that might be tenants.One example might be immigration lawyers, a service that clientsoften need but that the organization does not provide, Gomezsaid.Padilla said the model of owning a building that functions as aone-stop legal service facility is a new endeavor for theorganization. Of the buildings that house its 20 regional offices,the organization owns or co-owns five.If the model is successful in Oxnard, it may be used at otherCalifornia Rural Legal Assistance operations."I'm hoping that what this center does is open a dialogue withother nonprofit leaders to plan out what are the legal needs of thecommunity that could be served through such a center," Padillasaid.For information about reprinting this article, go tohttp://www.lats.com/rights