Oregon Poor Vitally Need Legal BoostRobert LandauerTuesday, October 22, 2002If you can't get a lawyer, you can't afford to be poor.Consider this memo on a case handled through El Programa Hispanoof St. Henry Catholic Community Hispanic Center in Gresham:"Eva Cortes-Espino went to Affordable Automobile Wholesale Inc.(AAW) in Southeast Portland on Aug. 7 searching for a car. . . .She asked to see the title, wondering about previous owners and thepossibility of past accidents. AAW assured her that the car hadnever been in an accident and had only one previous owner. Eva wasput under . . . pressure to purchase the car immediately. Eva can'tread English and a translator was not involved. . . . Eva signed acontract putting down $1,300 and financing the balance of $4,500 ata 39.6 percent interest rate."Eva immediately had problems with the car. She tried to return(it), but to no avail. Eva's mechanic friend inspected the car andfound several large sticks lodged underneath the car to prevent itfrom rattling. The mechanic determined that the car had beentotaled, citing a cracked engine block."No liability was conceded, but Cortes-Espino got fullrestitution. The dealer took the car back. The deposit wasreturned. The buyer was taken off the finance-contract hook. All ofthis required muscle. It was applied pro bono by attorney RobertHamrick at the Schwabe Williamson & Wyatt law firm's EastCounty Legal Clinic.Reflect also on 5-year-old Seth Jackson-Mack's chances to livean ordinary life. This recent Head Start graduate has had a seizuredisorder since he was 10 months old. Rules prevented Head Startfrom administering oxygen, so mother Sonja had to be at the schoolor nearby with an oxygen pack.The family's 1999 application for Supplemental Security Incometo help with Seth's care was denied. So was its 2001 request. ThenLegal Aid in Multnomah County helped with an appeal.SSI applications require detailed information from treatment andservice providers to succeed. Few people get easy, inexpensiveaccess to doctors' records or, in this case, to teachers'evaluations of Seth's speech difficulties.Legal Aid attorney Leslie Kay provided record-gathering andlegal expertise and prepared a case for hearing. On April 26,Seth's family learned that he is eligible for benefits. In hiskindergarten class, he can be given oxygen when he needs it, speechtutoring and other help. Mother Sonja will be able to get qualifiedcare for Seth and take up schooling or part-time work.Lawyers at Todd Trierweiler & Associates attempt rescuemissions in monthly bankruptcy clinics. The firm's support staffhelps volunteer non-bankruptcy attorneys to enter data for thoselawyers' bankruptcy forms.Volunteer pro bono and Legal Aid services such as these arevitally needed as poor and moderate-income Oregonians try to stayhealthy in a sick economy. Two years ago, only 18 percent of low-income people could get legal help for their problems, a studysponsored by the Oregon State Bar and the state found. The averagestatewide jobless rate back then was 4.9 percent, lowest in thenation. Almost two percentage points higher now, it's one of thehighest. Two years ago fewer than 40,000 people were unemployed inPortland. It's 75,000 now.Almost 486,000 Oregonians are eligible for free civil legalservices. But only 111 of Oregon's 11,000 attorneys work for LegalAid. Low-income families desperately need more private-sectorlawyers to volunteer services (and money) to help full-time LegalAid professionals lift the load.More family-law services are essential, especially in childcustody and domestic violence cases, the bar study reports.Advocacy help is needed to increase the quantity and quality ofhousing for low-income people, reduce unlawful discrimination andenforce the residential landlord tenant act in the face ofevictions. Cases involving collection of wages, wrongful discharge,discrimination and unsafe working conditions have becomeconspicuous as Oregonians struggle against a vicious economicundertow.The urgent thrust of this year's Lawyers' Campaign for EqualJustice, now at full flood, is to have more private lawyers throwlifelines to the poor, elderly, disabled, unemployed anddisadvantaged drowning in the legal surf.