Chicago Daily Law BulletinMay 21, 2002Marketing Group to Offer 'Pro Bono' ServicesKate SchottLaw Bulletin Staff WriterA legal marketing group in Chicago is asking its members to dowhat lawyers have been doing for years.The Chicago chapter of the Legal Marketing Association willoffer pro bono services to legal-aid organizations in the city.Members of the LMA will help the groups develop long-term businessplans and marketing strategies.While gaining access to justice is their first priority, mostlegal-aid organizations put marketing and development on the backburner.They often survive on a bare-bones budget, a staff of volunteersand generous donations- all for the sake of helping disadvantaged and low-incomepeople obtain legal services. Many legal-aid organizations have astrong mission but lack a long-term plan, said Pat Stankard, clientservices manager at Gardner, Carton & Douglas and formertreasurer of the LMA."These are issues that we wrestle with in practice groups of lawfirms," she said. "What is your plan? If [the legal-aidorganizations] have a direction and a plan and goals, you havesomething you can work towards."But most legal-aid organizations can't afford and don't have theresources to develop marketing."[The project] represents an opportunity for marketingprofessionals within the law firms to do some of the same [pro bonowork] we ask our lawyers to do," said Michael R. Ralston, presidentof the LMA and director of marketing for Vedder, Price. "It wasthat recognition that led us to ... undertake this."Although it's common for lawyers to offer pro bono services toclients in need, Stankard said, legal marketing professionalshistorically haven't done so."We thought it was a great opportunity for legal marketers togive something back to the legal community," she said.Stankard said the marketing professionals will offer advice suchas developing marketing brochures, volunteer recognition andincreased advertising.The Chicago Bar Foundation, which supports about 40 legal-aidorganizations, will hold a seminar/reception with LMA members todiscuss the project at 5 p.m. Thursday at the law office of Sidley,Austin, Brown & Wood.To start, the Foundation hopes to match LMA members with atleast 10 of its organizations.Legal aid organizations are in great need of increasedawareness, says Leslie A. Corbett, executive director ofCoordinated Advice and Referral Program for Legal Services. Shesaid the groups provide little information to the general publicand the legislature, which need the education the most."[The public and legislature] don't see legal services as asocial service," Corbett said. "They see it as a lawyer's job."But the legal-aid groups don't know how to spread the word aboutthe positive benefits of their work."Bottom line -- we just don't know how to do that," Corbettsaid. "I think legal-aid organizations and small nonprofits don'teven think about [public relations] and marketing because all oftheir resources go into the services they provide."Julia C. Langfelder began her job as the development coordinatorfor the Center for Conflict Resolution about a year ago. Herposition is the first in CCR's history and was developed to expandthe group's reach through special events, marketing and publicrelations."It's very new to the organization and it's interesting comingin from a [business] marketing background," she said. "I think innonprofits in general there's a lack of [marketing]."One reason, she said, is a due to a limited budget."It's very difficult but you get very creative," she said. "Youstart looking into new ways of [planning events]."In her experience, legal aid organizations are in need oflong-term plans, guidance and structure, she said."Marketing is a process and lot of people don't realize that,"Langfelder said. "A lot of people have a misconception that thiscan happen overnight."[The pro bono project] is a great asset for all of us," shesaid. "This is really going to push us forward."