Roanoke Times & World NewsLegal Aid Group Celebrates 30 Years of ServicePaul DellingerThursday, November 14, 2002Southwest Virginia Legal Aid serves 17 counties with 14 lawyersand a 32-member staff, but Joe Tate remembers it didn't start thatway."The first day I showed up at Legal Aid, I interviewed myself,"he said. He was its only lawyer at first.Tate, now in private practice in Marion, was hired as theprogram's first director in 1972 after a Marion-based communityaction program secured grant money to establish the Smyth-BlandLegal Aid Society.That was the start of legal aid in Southwest Virginia, and Tatewas among those who gathered here over the weekend to celebrate its30 years of service. It now covers localities from Lee County toChristiansburg."The Smyth County bar was rather small, and the Bland County barwas Sam Hardy," Tate said, referring to the man who, for manyyears, was the only lawyer in Bland County. So the effort to bringlegal services to those who could not otherwise afford them beganin a small way.Many viewed the early legal aid lawyers as "wild-eyed radicals,"Tate said. "We started with a budget that today wouldn't pay thesalary of one staff person."The office handled 60 cases in its first year. By 1973, it hadopened an office in Abingdon and, in 1976, in Wytheville. Most ofits early cases involved divorce and family law. In 1978, itchanged its name to Southwest Virginia Legal Aid Society.Eilene McIlvane, who was not a lawyer, became its executivedirector in 1981. By then, the program had added Carroll andGrayson counties and the city of Galax and had five attorneys.Larry Harley, who became its executive director in 1993 and stillholds that office, joined it in 1975 as a paralegal and came backin 1979 as a lawyer.In the 1960s, Harley said, legal aid lawyers were banned frompracticing in some courts, so the Southwest Virginia group becamepartners with the private bar to avoid that.During the early 1980s, federal funding for legal aid wasreduced and, by 1984, only the Marion office was still in business.By the late 1980s, state funding increased. By 1990, the program'swork mainly involved helping people with food stamps, housing,health care and other basic needs. By 1995, it employed fourlawyers."We caught our stride in the '80s and '90s. We still have a longway to go," Harley said. "I like to think we will never feel thatwe have arrived."The Legal Services Corp., which is now the program's majorfunding source, began pushing in 1995 for smaller programs tomerge. Between 2000 and 2001, those west of Roanoke did. The boardof the New River Valley Legal Aid Society voted to join theSouthwest Virginia group. The head of Client Centered LegalServices in the westernmost part of the state opposed the merger,but the Southwest Virginia group eventually hired nine formeremployees of that agency and opened a new office in the coalfields.Its offices are now in Castlewood, Marion and Christiansburg.Asked later about the program's future, Harley said it is onlynow settling in to its expanded service area and seeking continuingpartnerships with the private bar and various agencies."We're entering a time of reduced funding for much of our work,but we just got an increase in our domestic violence funding, andwe are working closely with the seven domestic-violence programswithin our service area," he said. The new funding comes throughthe U.S. Department of Justice.Justice Cynthia Kinser of the Virginia Supreme Court, keynotespeaker for the celebration, said the concept of legal aid can betraced back to wording in England's Magna Carta, but the firstversion in this country was an 1876 program in New York to helpGerman immigrants. That organization changed its name to Legal AidSociety in 1890.It was the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964 that began providingfederal funding for programs to bring legal services to the poor,Kinser said. "Legal Services has fundamentally changed howgovernment agencies relate to the poor," she said.