Deseret NewsFriday, April 12, 2002Kudos for Supporting Legal CenterBy John A. AdamsThe Utah State Legislature in the just-completed session hasstepped forward in a year of very difficult financial challengesand, in honor of their colleague the late Sen. Pete Suazo,appropriated $100,000 toward the purchase of a building to createthe nation's first Community Legal Center.Sen. Suazo, who represented Salt Lake's urban and diverseDistrict 2, was admired by his Senate colleagues for his tirelessefforts for equal access to justice for all of Utah's citizens. TheCommunity Legal Center will be located in Sen. Suazo's district andis a project of the state's leading providers of free civil legalservices to lower-income individuals and families -- the DisabilityLaw Center, the Legal Aid Society of Salt Lake and Utah LegalServices. Their efforts, like those of Sen. Suazo, promote economicand family stability, fight injustice and help people helpthemselves.These three agencies, which have a total of 35 lawyers and 84staff employees, last year provided legal advice or representedclients in disputes in over 21,000 legal matters. The agenciesresolve serious legal problems for those with no place else to turn-- the poor, ethnic minorities, seniors and people withdisabilities. The building will also house two smallervolunteer-based programs, the Multi-Cultural Law Center and theSenior Lawyer Volunteer Project.Each of these not-for-profit legal service providers has aspecific mission or client base: Utah Legal Services focuses legalassistance to the state's low-income residents; Legal Aid Societyassists clients with domestic relations and domestic violenceissues in Salt Lake County; Disability Law Center focuses onassistance to people with physical and mental disabilities; theSenior Lawyer Volunteer Project assists elderly individuals withestate planning and end-of-life issues; and the Multi-Cultural LawCenter provides a variety of legal aid to Utah's growing ethniccommunities.To their credit, these groups have been a model of cooperationand innovation to improve efficiencies in the delivery of legalservices in our state. Several years ago they formed the "andJustice for All" campaign, which raises money from members of theprivate Utah State Bar. Utah's lawyers and law firms are among themost generous in the nation; more than $1.5 million has been raisedsince the campaign began.Co-location helps the agencies meet three important goals.First, "one-stop shopping" will make access to legal aid and ournation's system of justice easier for Utahns.Second, it will allow the agencies to share some staff andservices to achieve efficiencies of operation.Last, it will provide greater opportunity for volunteer serviceby private attorneys and law students. It should be noted that twoof these agencies also have offices in Ogden, Provo and Cedar Cityso that legal needs elsewhere in the state may be served.The former Morrison and Merrill Building located at 205 N. 400West is the site of the new Community Legal Center. The30,000-square-foot building was recently refurbished by its priorowner, the Olafson Group, which generously donated $400,000 towardthe $4 million project.The appropriation of $100,000 sends a clear message that Utah'slegislators and Gov. Mike Leavitt are willing to lead out and notjust give lip service to helping Utahns obtain access to our legalsystem. It is hoped that the example of our political leaders,coupled with the generous contributions already made byorganizations and individuals, including the George S. and DoloresDore Eccles Foundation, the Utah Bar Foundation, the Herbert I. andElse B. Michael Foundation, the cities of Salt Lake and Murray, andthe agencies, employees and boards of trustees, will prompt otherfoundations, businesses and private citizens to contribute theremaining funds necessary to pay for the purchase of thebuilding.Apart from the capital campaign that is now under way, Utahlawyers are making a major difference in helping increase access tojustice. Last year more than a third of the members of the UtahState Bar contributed to the "and Justice for All" campaign, andmore than $440,000 was raised to help these agencies operate andperform their vital mission.People pulling together for a common worthwhile cause makes allthe difference, but leadership starts at the top. Thanks to ourLegislature for leading out in difficult financial times.John A. Adams is president-elect of the Utah State Bar.