Chicago Daily Law BulletinApril 27, 2002Volunteers Step Up on Law DayRobert E. HirshonOn Law Day, lawyers throughout the nation are going back toschool.They're going into classrooms to help students understand andappreciate fundamental American values. A new "Dialogue on Freedom"Web site -- www.dialogueonfreedom.org -- is giving lawyers thetools to conduct robust discussions with students. The hope is thatyoung people will come to understand that we can maintain thefreedoms that are rooted in our nation's very soul while ensuringthe safety of our citizens. Even within the new and frighteninglandscape of the post-Sept. 11 world, the familiar landmarks of theConstitution and the Bill of Rights can -- indeed, must -guideus.This major initiative, conceived by Supreme Court JusticeAnthony M. Kennedy, is the American Bar Association's principal LawDay outreach this year. I salute the men and women of the legalprofession who are donating their time, skills and experience toenhance public understanding of and respect for the rule of lawthat defines our democracy and protects our freedoms.Another kind of attorney volunteerism deserves a salute on thisLaw Day -- the tireless pro bono efforts of lawyers, wherebyattorneys take no fee for legal work that enables people of limitedmeans to get the help they need.Over the entrance to the U.S. Supreme Court are carved the words"Equal Justice Under Law." These words represent both a reality andan aspiration. A reality in that America's courts are open toeveryone, and even the least powerful can seek justice, against themightiest opponents. But the words are also an aspiration, becausemany Americans can't afford legal services, and so are unable totake full advantage of our great legal system. The American BarAssociation and state and local bar associations have workedtirelessly to bring legal services to more and more people. Inkeeping with those efforts, "Assuring Equal Justice for All" is thetheme of Law Day this year.I first became involved in the work of the ABA when I wasappointed to the Standing Committee on Lawyers' Public ServiceResponsibility. A substantial focus of our work then and now wasencouraging lawyers to donate their services pro bono publico --"for the good of the public." At that time, barely 20 yearsago:-The organized bar did not have an infrastructure tosupply volunteer lawyers to meet the legal needs of thepoor.-Bar-sponsored pro bono programs -- where they did exist-- were mostly local and mainly urban, with volunteer lawyersrepresenting a fairly narrow slice of the legalcommunity.Our profession, however, did not sit idly by. We organized.Working together, the ABA and the National Legal Aid and DefenderAssociation created a new system of legal services, linking probono programs with local legal service programs to serve the needsof this nation's low-income population.The most tangible evidence of this effort was the development ofbar-sponsored pro bono programs in every state, in every sizablemetropolitan area, and in many rural areas as well.The success of these programs is undeniable. We have not simplychanged a profession; we have changed lives.We have improved the lives of children -- by resolvingcomplicated and hostile family disputes, by facilitating adoptionsand custody agreements, and by helping children find the comfort,the certainty and the safety of home and family.We have improved the lives of the elderly -- by protecting oursenior citizens from unscrupulous business persons and by givingthe older generation financial security and comfort throughvoluntary estate planning.We have improved the lives of tens of thousands of women -- byassuring that those who are victims of domestic violence can seekorders of protection, divorces and child support, so they can leavedangerous situations and raise their children in an environmentwhere fear is not a constant companion.But more remains to be done. Even today, we estimate that only20 percent of the legal needs of the poor are met through legal aidand pro bono. I call on lawyers everywhere to share in the highestaspirations of our profession, and to help realize our unwavering,unyielding commitment to the 200-year-old promise of equal justiceunder law for everyone.