RURAL DELIVERY AND THE UNIVERSAL SERVICE OBLIGATION: AQuantitative InvestigationRobert H. Cohen William W. Ferguson Spyros S. XenakisPostal Rate Commission Office of Technical Analysis andPlanningJuly 31, 19921. Introduction1.1. Scope and PurposeIt is widely believed that it costs more to provide rural areaswith postal service than urban areas. This belief is basedprimarily on the perception of a cost differential between ruraland city delivery.1 This perception is one of the bases for theargument that a universal service requirement is necessary toassure the continuation of rural delivery or at least the level ofservice currently accorded rural areas.2The purpose of this paper is to analyze rural delivery costs andcompare them with city delivery costs. Using routine cost datasubmitted in the course of postal rate proceedings, Section 2 ofthis paper compares the cost of rural and urban delivery, Section 3shows the relationship of rural delivery cost to populationdensity, Section 4 analyzes the "profitability" (viz., contributionto overhead) of serving rural areas, and Section 5 presents someconcluding remarks and a brief summary. Before turning to Section2, some background information on rural delivery and city deliveryis offered.The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors anddo not necessarily represent the opinions of the Postal RateCommission.1According to the 1991 Comprehensive Statement on PostalOperations (p. 66), USPS delivery costs represent 30 percent oftotal costs; window service and mail processing, 32 percent;transportation, 7 percent; and administrative, building occupancy,and all other, 31 percent.2This paper focuses on the detailed comparison of delivery costs,between rural and urban areas. It does not purport to show thebearing, if any, this cost analysis might have on questionsregarding the complex issue of the postal monopoly, whichencompasses many issues beyond the scope of this paper.1.2. Relation of Rural Routes to Demographically DesignatedRural AreasThe Postal Service has about three times as many city deliveryletter routes as rural routes. City delivery routes servegeographic locations within the boundaries of a post office, whilerural routes generally serve areas falling outside theseboundaries.3 City and rural carriers are in separate labor unions,and their compensation is determined separately based on differentfactors.The United States Census Bureau (1990 data) reports thatslightly under 25 percent of the 250 million people living in theUnited States live in rural areas.4 The remainder live in urbanlocations.5,6,7In 1991, the United States postal system provided service to 102million delivery points. City routes served 78.5 million and ruralroutes (including contract routes) served 23.4 million deliverypoints.8,9 A total of 95 million delivery points3United States cities and the areas served by their post officesoften expand to absorb surrounding areas served by rural routes. Ittakes a great deal of time to administratively convert a ruralroute to a city delivery route. Thus, some rural routes will serveareas annexed by cities and their post offices.4 Bureau of the Census press release, CB91-334, Dec. 18,1991.5 As defined for the 1980 census, urban areas include: (a)places of 2,500 or more inhabitants incorporated as cities,villages, boroughs (except Alaska and New York) and towns (exceptin the New England states, New York and Wisconsin), but excludesthose persons living in the rural portions of extended cities; (b)census designated places of 2,500 or more inhabitants; and (c)other areas, incorporated or unincorporated, included in urbanizedareas. All non-urban areas are rural.6The Census Bureau reports that in 1980 there were 6,619incorporated places with more than 2,500 inhabitants. In 1991, theUnited States Postal Service provided city delivery to 6,625 postoffices, but not all were in incorporated areas.7The United Nations has estimated that 27.5 percent of thepopulation in the more developed nations would live in rural areasin 1990. See World Population Trends and Policies, 1987 MonitoringReport, The United Nations, Department of International Economicand Social Affairs, Population Division, page 176.8 Comprehensive Statement on Postal Operations, 1991, p. 49.9Highway contract routes (star routes) are similar to ruralroutes. The difference is that the carrier is a contractor to thePostal Service, not an employee. Contract routes serve 1.4 milliondelivery points.are residences; the remainder are businesses. Thus, rural (andhighway contract) routes serve slightly less than 25 percent oftotal residential delivery points; this is the same as thepercentage of the population living in rural areas.1.3. Description of Rural and City DeliveryAll rural routes use vehicles to deliver to a box placed alongthe roadside, and virtually all provide six-day-a-week delivery. Arural route is defined in terms of the roads it traverses. Homes orbusinesses not located on one of these roads must place a mailreceptacle along the route traveled. For this reason, boxes willfrequently be clustered where a rural route intersects roads not onthe route. In this sense, rural service is inferior to citydelivery where service is provided to (or in close proximity to)each building served.Most city delivery routes are "park-and-loop" routes. Thecarrier on these routes uses a vehicle to drive to various pointsalong the route where the carrier dismounts and delivers to aportion of the route on foot. Some city delivery routes, called"curb line routes," use vehicles to provide curbside delivery to amail receptacle along the curb as is done by rural routes. A thirdtype of city delivery route is the "foot route."City routes are further categorized as "business,""residential," and "mixed" (business and residential) routes.Business routes (consisting of at least 70 percent businessdeliveries), which account for less than one percent of allpossible city deliveries,10 are five-day-per-week routes. Mail onall other city routes is delivered six days a week. Very few routesservice businesses or residences exclusively. For example, onresidential routes (which account for 94 percent of all possiblecity deliveries), businesses account for five percent of possibledeliveries. The percentage of possible deliveries on rural routesthat are businesses is not known. Although the activities of cityand rural carriers are similar, some minor differences exist:-rural carriers spend about three percent of their total timeproviding retail services10"Possible delivery" is used to describe a household or businessaddress (including apartments and suites) to which mail might bedelivered by city carriers. "Box" is used to describe thereceptacles each family or business sets up on a rural route towhich mail might be delivered. The two terms stand for similarconcepts and for purposes of this paper are usedinterchangeably.(e.g., selling postage stamps, rating and receiving parcels,etc.);-city carriers provide no retail services;-rural carriers transport mail to and from small post officesalong their route; and-city carriers sweep more collection boxes along their routesthan do rural carriers.2. Comparison of the Cost of City and Rural Delivery2.1. Comparison of Carrier Time Required to Serve City andRural AreasTable 1 shows that the average time per day per possibledelivery is 1.04 minutes for city delivery11 and 1.07 minutes forrural delivery. (This small difference would be further reduced ifretail activities of rural carriers were not counted.) The virtualequality of the average carrier time to serve urban and ruralcustomers is a major finding of this paper. Part of the explanationfor this finding can be inferred from table 1- businesses requireconsiderably more time per possible city delivery than doresidences.The average possible delivery on business routes requires fivetimes as much carrier time as the average possible delivery onresidential routes. There are several reasons for this largedifference in carrier time:-Businesses receive almost three times as many pieces perpossible delivery as do residences. The statistics shown in table 1(row 2) reflect both in-office and out-of-office delivery time.12In-office time is closely related to volume.-In business areas, carriers travel by foot, and many deliver inlarge office buildings to individual suites.11This analysis includes only city delivery letter routes. Itexcludes parcel post and support routes which primarily servebusiness districts in larger cities.12City and rural carriers typically spend between three and fourhours in the office preparing for delivery.Table 1Selected Statisticsa for City Delivery and Rural Delivery Routes(1989)City Item Residential Park & Foot Curb LoopCity Residential, Business All Businessb and Mixed Rural Park& Total All Foot Curb Loop Total1.Possible Deliveries11.5 15.1 46.9 73.4 0.6 12.6 15.7 49.778.1 20.5 (millions)2.Minutes per Day per Possible Delivery 1.00 0.83 1.01 0.975.55 1.21 0.85 1.06 1.04 1.07 (in-office andout-of-office)3.Seconds per Piece13.24 9.54 12.93 12.22 21.44 14.78 9.6912.98 12.50 14.94(in-office and out-of-office)4.Pieces per Day per Possible Delivery 4.53 5.21 4.70 4.7815.52 4.89 5.28 4.92 5.01 4.30a See Appendix A for source.bReflects the fact that business routes receive service only 5days per week.-There are no curb delivery routes in business areas. Curbroutes are suitable only for residential areas. Table 1 (row 2)shows that they require less time than either foot or park-and-looproutes.On the other hand, a direct comparison of rural to cityresidential delivery reveals that rural carrier time per possibledelivery is only ten percent greater than city residential routedelivery time. (Seven percent higher if retail service costs areeliminated from rural.) There are at least three major reasons forrural route time per possible delivery being so close to thecorresponding time for city residential routes:-Rural routes are the functional equivalent of curbline citydelivery, the most efficient form of city residential delivery.Curbline routes, however, account for only 21 percent of cityresidential possible deliveries.-Rural routes have only 4.3 pieces per possible delivery, whilecity residential routes have4.8. Thus they incur less in-office costs.13-As described earlier, rural customers who do not live along therural route must place a mail receptacle along the rural route.Thus, rural mail boxes tend to cluster where roads (not on theroute) intersect with the carrier's route. A rural carrier canserve a cluster of boxes much faster than if the individual boxeswere spread out along the route where the carrier would have toslow down, stop, and accelerate for each one.Thus far, we have examined carrier time per possible delivery orper box. We now turn to the carrier time per piece delivered. Table1 (row 3) shows that carrier time per piece delivered is 12.5seconds per piece for all city and 12.2 seconds for residentialcity. This contrasts with 14.9 seconds per piece for rural routes.Thus, on a delivered piece basis, rural routes use 20 percent morecarrier time than do all city routes, and 22 percent more than cityresidential routes. The major explanation for this is fewer averagepieces per possible delivery per day for rural routes (row 4).13Part of the reason for the difference in pieces per possibledelivery may be due to the fact that five percent of possibleresidential deliveries are businesses, and it is thought, but notknown, that a lesser percentage of possible deliveries on ruralroutes are businesses.2.2. Labor CostThe previous section compared city and rural delivery on thebasis of time. This section estimates postal labor delivery costthat corresponds to units of time in order to convert time intomoney in subsequent sections.The Postal Service uses both full-time regular carriers andcasual employees (less than full-time or temporary) on its city andrural routes. Casual employees are paid lower wages and have fewerfringe benefits. Consequently, their cost to the Postal Service isfar less than for full-time employees.Full-time rural carriers' compensation is slightly lower thanfull-time city carriers. They incur less overtime and the ruralcarrier work force has a higher proportion of casual employees. Asa result, rural carrier labor cost to the Postal Service in 1989averaged $20.60 per work hour, or 34.3 per minute.14,15 Incontrast, in 1989 city carrier labor cost the Postal Service $24.49per work hour, or 40.8 per minute.16The difference in labor costs for rural and city carriers hasits roots in the development of the two crafts. In another postalsystem there might be no differences in the compensation of cityand rural carriers or it might be much larger. In the UnitedStates, rural wages are generally lower than urban wages.For purposes of city and rural delivery cost analysis, wepresent (1) a comparison using the actual labor costs of the twocrafts, and (2) a comparison using the average labor costs of allPostal Service collective bargaining employees. This will allowboth an actual cost analysis and a resource comparison of city andrural routes. The average labor cost per bargaining unit employeein 1989 was $24.09 per work hour or 40.2 per minute.17 This isvery close to the average city carrier cost.14Highway contract carriers have compensation much lower thanrural carriers. Because they are not postal employees, we do notinclude them in postal labor costs.15See Appendix B for derivation. Includes wages, premium payments(e.g.,17 See Footnote 15.2.3. Delivery Vehicle CostRural carriers furnish their own vehicles and provide allmaintenance, repairs, and fuel, for which they are paid anallowance.18 In 1989, rural carriers received an average of 34cents per mile as a motor vehicle allowance. The average length ofa rural route is 55 miles. The average annual cost per rural routeis shown in table 2.Those city delivery carriers who make use of a vehicle arefurnished with one by the Postal Service which also provides allmaintenance, repairs, and fuel. City carriers drive an estimated 15miles per day. Analyzing Postal Service accounts for depreciation,fuel, and maintenance for city delivery carriers, we have estimatedthe average city delivery vehicle cost per route.19This is also shown in table 2.Rural vehicle cost per box or possible delivery is twice theaverage city carrier vehicle cost per possible delivery. Ruralvehicle cost per delivered piece is two and a half times citycarrier cost per delivered piece. It should be borne in mind that,though the "city" column divides total city vehicle cost by18In 1989, the rural carrier vehicle allowance was 31 cents permile or a minimum of $12.40 per day, whichever was greater.19 See Appendix C.the total number of city routes (including foot routes), only 84percent of possible city deliveries are made by city carriers usingvehicles.2.4. Comparison of Direct Labor Plus Vehicle Cost to Serve Cityand Rural AreasTable 3 combines labor cost with vehicle cost for city and ruralcarriers. It shows that when vehicle costs are added, thedifference in cost per box per day between city and rural carriersdepends heavily on which labor cost is used. Using actual laborcosts, the city cost per box per day is 7.5 percent higher. Usingthe average bargaining labor cost, city delivery is 8 percentlower. On a cost-per-piece basis, city costs are 8 percent lowerusing actual labor costs and 21 percent lower using the averagebargaining labor costs.3. Relation of Rural Delivery Cost to Population DensityA priori, population density should have an important effect onrural delivery cost. We have no data available which directlyrelate rural delivery cost to population density, but it seems verylikely that boxes per mile is highly correlated with populationdensity.In order to examine the impact of density on cost, rural routeshave been divided into quintiles based on boxes per mile. Table 4displays the relevant data. It can be seen that there iswide variation between the quintiles. In the extreme, theaverage number of boxes per route differs by a factor of two. Theaverage number of miles differs by a factor of 4.5. Average boxesper mile differ by a factor of nine. Moreover, with the exceptionof daily evaluated time and daily pieces delivered per box, theaverage values of all variables change monotonically. Thus, theyare correlated with boxes per mile.Table 4Distribution of Rural Routes by Density (Boxes per Mile)Selective Averagesa (1989)a See Appendix A for source.The first or least densely populated quintile stands out fromthe remaining four. Its time per box is half again larger than themean for all rural routes and it is nearly two standard deviationsgreater than the mean for all rural routes. The other fourquintiles are less than one standard deviation from the mean.Moreover, the first quintile stands apart in that its secondsper piece is also nearly two standard deviations greater than themean, while the other four are all less than one standard deviationfrom the mean.20 Thus, the two measures of cost for the firstquintile are substantially greater than for the other fourquintiles. This will be seen clearly in Section 4, where theprofitability of rural delivery is calculated for eachquintile.It would not be surprising to find that the percentage of boxeswhich are businesses increases as population density increases. Ifthis is true, it could at least partially explain why the number ofpieces delivered per box is so much larger for the fourth and fifthquintile than it is for the other three.Finally, the variability (or elasticity) of time with respect tovolume for the five quintiles differs greatly:All 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th Routes.29 .37 .44 .53 .57 .44Thus, for example, if the volume in the first quintile were todouble, total cost would increase by 29 percent. The variationbetween quintiles can be explained by greater fixed costs in theless densely populated quintiles than in the more populatedquintiles. The time required to drive the route is fixed, anddriving time represents a greater proportion of total cost in theless densely populated quintiles.Figure 1 displays the minutes per box per day as a function ofdensity. It can be seen that time per box drops off sharply at thelow end of the density spectrum and then it flattens.20The daily evaluated time per box for all routes (1.07 minutes)has a standard deviation of 0.30 minutes. The daily evaluated timeper piece for all routes (14.94 seconds) has a standard deviationof 4.64 seconds.2.4000002.2000002.0000001.8000001.6000001.4000001.2000001.0000000.8000000.600000 0 5 1015202530354045In order to isolate the effect of density on time per box, theelasticity of time per box with respect to density has beencalculated using the route evaluation factors (which are used todetermine rural carrier pay). Holding constant the pieces per ruralbox and route miles, a one percent increase in density reducesout-of-office time per box by 0.44 percent and total time per boxby 0.27 percent.2121The relation between time per box and boxes per mile (density)is exponential, or linear in logarithms. The Pearson correlationcoefficient between the logarithmic values of the two variables is-78.60 percent. The econometrically estimated constant elasticitycoefficient of a simple log- linear model with time per box as thedependent variable and boxes per mile as the explanatory variableis -27.45 percent with a t value of -266.22.4. "Profitability" of Serving Rural Areas22This section addresses the question: Does the United StatesPostal Service find it remunerative to serve rural areas? Arevenue/cost model of rural delivery has been constructed todetermine the profitability23,24 of rural delivery by quintile. Itssimple structure is presented below:Model for Calculating Profit (Loss) Per Box22"Profit" here means contribution to fixed overhead costs overand above paying the fixed overhead of rural delivery.23The model presented here is valid only for an unsubsidizedpostal system such as the Postal Service.24The simplifying assumption is made that there is no costdifference between city and rural mail with respect to mailprocessing, transportation, and retail service.Line 1-the revenue per rural box per day is calculated bymultiplying average Postal Service revenue per piece (from theRevenue, Pieces and Weight Report for 1989) times the averagenumber of pieces per box per day (from table 4). Line 2-ruraldelivery cost per box per day consists of (1) labor cost,(2) vehicle cost, and (3) indirect costs.25 Labor cost per boxis obtained by multiplying labor cost per minute (from Section 2.1)by the average number of minutes per box (from table 4). Vehiclecost per box per day are from table 2.26 Because there are twolabor costs per minute, one actual and the other theoretical, themodel is used separately for each labor cost and provides twoannual profit (loss) computations.Line 3-here the model takes into account the cost of gettingmail to the point of delivery (e.g., processing, transportation,administrative, retail, etc.). This is done by bifurcating theaverage attributable cost27 per piece into delivery attributablecost28 and nondelivery attributable cost.29 Rural carrier cost andthe nondelivery attributable cost are then subtracted to arrive ata profit (loss) per box per day.Observers familiar with Postal Rate Commission costingprocedures will recognize that rural delivery cost per box includesthe attributable and institutional costs associated with thatfunction. The Commission found in the most recent omnibus rate case(Docket R90-1), that 39 percent of rural delivery costs areattributable (i.e., vary with volume) and 61 percent are25Appendix D presents indirect costs in more detail and shows howthey are calculated.26Dr. John Haldi has brought to our attention that the dailyvehicle cost per box is not the same for all quintiles, as wasassumed in an early version of the paper, but decreases withpopulation density. The estimated daily vehicle cost per box in therevenue/cost model now recognizes the density differences among thefive quintiles:27Attributable costs are the postal costs causally traceable tomail. They consist predominantly of volume variable costs. Theremaining costs are called institutional costs, and they can betreated as fixed. In the United States, the Rate Commissiondetermines the attributable cost for each class and subclass ofmail. Its most recent analysis is contained in the Docket R90-1Opinion and Recommended Decision.28These are the attributable (direct and indirect) costs arisingfrom the delivery function. We have estimated them for purposes ofthis analysis.29 These are total attributable costs minus deliveryattributable costs.institutional (i.e., nonvariable).30 Because such a largepercentage of the costs are fixed, the profitability calculation issensitive to both the average revenue per piece and the averagepieces per box. If the postal system operated at a lower scale,revenue per piece would need to be higher to maintain the samerevenue cost balance. It is not clear, without further analysis,what would happen to profitability if the system operated at alower scale.31The average revenue per piece for the entire Postal Service isused to estimate the average revenue per box. We have noindependent estimate of the average revenue for mail delivered byrural carriers. If mail delivered by rural carriers has a differentcomposition compared to the system as a whole, profitabilityconclusions would vary. In that case, the nondelivery attributablecosts would vary in the same direction as revenue, but not byenough to offset the revenue change.Table 5 provides both the input and output for the profitabilitycalculations for all rural routes in 1989. It can be seen that byserving all rural routes and using actual labor costs, the PostalService realized an average profit of 10.8 cents per box per day,or a total annual profit for all rural routes of $669 million. Toput this figure in perspective, the total accrued expenditures forthe Postal Service in 1989 were $39 billion.32Table 5 shows that, using the average labor cost for allbargaining employees, the profit drops to $283 million. The profitfrom serving all rural routes is obviously highly sensitive to thelabor cost of rural carriers. However, using either labor costfigure, rural delivery was profitable for the Postal Service.If, in 1989, the Postal Service's overall surplus had been muchlarger, the profit from rural delivery would no doubt have beengreater. Conversely, if the year had been one in which the Servicehad a sizeable deficit, rural delivery would have been lessprofitable. Fortunately for purposes of this analysis, the Serviceessentially broke even in 1989 and so the profit from30In Docket R90-1, the variability or elasticity of evaluatedrural route costs with respect to volume was estimated at 44percent by the Postal Service.31It does seem clear that the ratio of mail delivered to ruralboxes to mail delivered to city addresses is an important factor indetermining profitability.32 The Postal Service surplus for 1989 was under $100million.rural delivery need not be interpreted based on the PostalService's overall financial results.Table 6 displays the profitability of all five quintiles ofrural routes (based on population density) using both actualcompensation and average bargaining compensation. It can be seenthat the profit per box differs substantially from the first (orleast densely populated) quintile of rural routes to the fifth (ormost densely populated) quintile. Using actual labor cost only, thefirst quintile was unprofitable, while, using average bargaininglabor cost, the first two quintiles were unprofitable.Because the most densely populated quintiles of routes servemore boxes, their total profit is disproportionate to their per-box profit. Using either labor cost, the third, fourth, and fifthquintiles were profitable.Given the assumptions discussed above, rural delivery isremunerative and it is unlikely that it would be abandoned if theuniversal service requirement were eliminated. Some observers,however, might expect the Postal Service to either drop or reducethe level of service to the boxes in the first or second quintilesof rural routes. The first quintile comprises only 2.5 percent ofall addresses served by rural and city carriers combined. Thesecond serves 3.9 percent.5. Concluding Remarks and Summary5.1. Concluding RemarksWhile the boxes served by the quintile of routes serving theleast densely populated areas are unprofitable, we believe that itis unlikely that the Postal Service would discontinue service tothem (or try to decrease their level of service) if the universalservice requirement were eliminated.-The total loss on those boxes is small relative to total costsof the Postal Service.-Because these routes are scattered all over the country, boxeson these routes are not easily identifiable without consulting anextensive list. Consequently, it would be costly for firms toseparate mail addressed to these boxes from their remainingmail.-The transaction costs involved in putting pieces addressed toboxes in the first quintile of rural routes in the hands of anotherdelivery firm, which would serve these addresses, would also behigh.-If these addresses were dropped from the delivery network, itwould likely reduce the volume of mail sent by these addresses tothe remaining portions of the delivery network. Thus, profitablevolume would be lost.Perhaps the above four points are simply underlying reasons forthe truism that for common carriers serving the general population,larger service networks (be they mail, package, overnight, ortelephone) are more valuable to customers and providers thansmaller service networks. It is no accident that, within the UnitedStates, United Parcel Service provides ubiquitous service forparcels.33 Federal Express and other overnight carriers do the samefor overnight delivery. Moreover, the major long distance telephonecarriers also provide ubiquitous service. Quite possibly, all ofthese common carriers find that sparsely settled portions of thecountry are unprofitable to serve. That these organizations provideuniversal service suggests that rural areas would receive postalservice even absent a universal service requirement.5.2. Summary-In the United States postal system, there is no real differencein the carrier time required to serve city and rural addresses.-The average city delivery cost reflects the higher cost ofserving businesses compared to residences.-Rural delivery cost reflects a lower level of service than citydelivery.33UPS does not provide parcel service at the ordinary rate to theAlaska bush where there are no roads and service must be providedby air.-Because fewer pieces are delivered per box on rural routes thanper possible delivery on city routes, the per piece delivery costis higher for rural routes than for city routes.-The cost of delivery per box for the least densely populatedquintile of rural routes is much higher than the average for allrural routes.-The revenue from mail delivered to rural areas as a wholeexceeds the cost of handling and delivering that mail.-There is a loss on serving the least densely populated quintileof rural routes.-It is likely that if the universal service requirement wereeliminated, even the most sparsely populated rural areas wouldreceive service.Appendix A. Major Data SourcesA.1. City Delivery Carrier DataThe 1989 city delivery carrier data used in this paper are basedon information from several Postal Service data systems. Total citydelivery carrier work hoursa come from payroll hours accountingsystems data made available in the most recent rate proceeding.These work hours are apportioned among city delivery carrier routetypes on the basis of cost allocations from the In-Office CostSystem,b an ongoing work sampling system that is used to allocatecosts for certain labor crafts among different activities and ratecategories for ratemaking purposes.Information concerning the total number of possible deliveriesis taken from the 1989 City Delivery National Totals Report.Carrier Cost System (CCS) data are used to allocate total possibledeliveries among different route types and to determine the averagepieces per possible delivery for different delivery and route typeson letter routes. The CCS is used in rate cases to determineattributable costs and associated distribution keys for certaincity carrier activities. CCS data are collected throughout the yearfrom over 500 thousand sampled stops on city delivery letterroutes.A.2. Rural Delivery Carrier DataMost rural routes are evaluated routes. Evaluated routes arethose routes for which the rural carrier's annual salary iscalculated using a set of standard time allowances. Time standardsare applied to workload elements (e.g., mileage, delivery boxes,quantity of mail by shape, etc.) to calculate the total evaluatedtime required to serve a rural route, and thus the salary of thecarrier serving that route.To measure the workload elements needed to calculate theevaluated time, a National Mail Count for most rural routes isconducted periodically in accordance with the labor agreementbetween the United States Postal Service and the union of ruralcarriers. The statistics on rural routes presented in this paperare based on the 1989 National Mail Count data.caDocket R90-1, USPS-LR-F-342.b Docket R90-1, USPS-T-13, W/S 7.0.7, p. 1.cThe Postal Service used a sample of the 1989 National Mail Countdata to measure the elasticity (variability) of rural carrier costswith respect to mail volume. Docket R90-1, USPS-T-13, AppendixF.The 1989 National Mail Count was conducted for 24 delivery daysfrom September 5 to October 2, 1989, and included 44,775 ruralroutes out of a total of 46,197. Data for a few of the countedrural routes appeared to be internally inconsistent. Counted routesthat had one or more of the following properties were deleted:d-A difference between weekly actual and evaluated time greaterthan 1,000 minutes.This edit resulted in 931 deletions. Data from the remaining43,844 rural routes were used to calculate the statistics presentedin this paper.d The Postal Service performed a similar edit on the sample ofroutes selected for measuring the elasticity of rural carriercosts. Docket R90-1, USPS-T-13, Appendix F, p. F-8.aPRC Library Reference 5, Docket R90-1. b USPS City DeliveryStatistics National Totals, FY 1989.cL.1/L.2. d Six (6) delivery days per week times 52 weeks less 10holidays.eL.3/L.4. f L.1/L.6. g L.7/L.4. h L.8/5.01. The denominator(5.01) is the average number of pieces perday per possible delivery for city delivery routes from table1.aCosts for rural carriers estimated as a percentage of ruralcarrier direct labor costs to total labor costs.b46,197 rural routes from the USPS FY 1989 Rural DeliveryStatistics National Report times 442.79 (the average number ofboxes served per route) from the 1989 Rural Carrier National MailCount.cL.4/L.5.d Six (6) delivery days per week times 52 weeks less 10holidays.eL.6/L.7.