A Comparison of the Burden of Universal Service in Italy*and the United StatesRobert Cohen Rossana ScoccheraPostal Rate Commission Poste ItalianeCarla Pace Vincenzo Visco ComandiniPoste Italiane Poste ItalianeMatthew Robinson John WallerPostal Rate Commission Postal Rate CommissionGennaro Scarfiglieri Spyros XenakisPoste Italiane Postal Rate Commission1. INTRODUCTIONSamuel Johnson said Patriotism is the last refuge of a scoundreland many postal observers believe that the Universal ServiceObligation (USO) is the last refuge of a postal service wishing toprotect inefficiency, monopoly profits, or economic rents. Despiteinefficient service, opaque accounts, and large rents, many postalofficials maintain that the monopoly, whatever its faults, is theonly means of ensuring universal, affordable postal service forcitizens throughout the nation. Without the monopoly, they argue,the post office would be crushed by the cost of the USO. This paperexamines when this argument might be valid.All posts probably have some cost associated with the USO, butit has been difficult to quantify. We agree with John Panzar (2001)that the cost of the USO is the cost of the services that would notbe provided in a competitive market. Under this definition, inpractice, there has been no discernable USO cost. Competitionexists in both Sweden and New Zealand and the incumbent posts havecontinued to provide universal service with no subsidy.The USO as defined by the proponents of the monopoly goes wellbeyond ubiquitous service. It also includes a uniform price withrespect to location of the recipient1 and a uniform frequency ofdelivery. These conditions might have been appropriate a centuryago when the post was the primary means of communication. Todayhowever, this definition seems unduly restrictive. It is incumbenton defenders of the restrictive definition of USO to explain whypostal service should be treated*The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors anddo not necessarily represent the opinions of Poste Italiane or thePostal Rate Commission.In other words a firm cannot charge more for delivering similaritems to addresses in one section of the country than another.Under this definition United Parcel Service (UPS) is not a trueuniversal service provider because it imposes a surcharge forresidential delivery. This is ironic because UPS delivers to everyaddress in the continental U.S. and delivers right to the door. ThePostal Service which is a universal service provider under thedefinition used here, delivers to mail boxes that are, in manycases, remote from the actual address.differently from other important products such as groceries,bank accounts and internet service.2 Notwithstanding, we use thisrestrictive definition of universal service for this paper.The obligation to provide ubiquitous service is not in itselfonerous. It has been pointed out by the American co-authors of thispaper that a post could rationalize its delivery costs by reducingthe frequency of service on unprofitable routes to the point wherethey become profitable (Cohen et al. 2000). A post could alsorationalize its prices by reflecting the cost of service todifferent areas. The restrictive definition of the USO does notallow a post to rationalize either its cost or pricing structure,3thus, creating cream-skimming opportunities under liberalization.The burden that the restrictive USO imposes on a post is theincrease in its unit costs resulting from cream skimming underliberalization caused by the requirements of uniform pricing andlevels of service. We use the term "burden of the USO" todistinguish our concept from other papers that use the term "costof the USO."We believe that insights into the burden of the USO can begained by comparing postal systems. Assuming that the keenestinsights can be gained by comparing systems with large differences,the Italian and United States systems are good candidates. TheU.S. has the highest volume per capita in the industrial world(739 pieces in 1999), while Italy has one of the lowest (115 piecesin 1999).4Previous work by Cohen et al. shows that the U.S. Postal Service(USPS) is not likely to require the monopoly to continue to satisfythe USO. (Cohen 1999, 2000) However, this result may not apply toall posts and it is important to distinguish magnitudes of burdenfor different posts. To this end, we develop a model to determinethe USO burden for posts with different per capita volumes. Inparticular, applying the model demonstrates that the burden of USOis very great for Poste Italiane and other posts with small percapita volumes. On the other hand, for the U.S. and other postswith large and medium per capita volumes the burden is small.We first compare some statistics for Italy and the U.S. We thenexamine the consequences of volume loss on postal systems in orderto provide a measure of burden in terms of increases in averageunit costs as volume is lost to competitors, or2Many postal services are increasingly becoming primarilycarriers of advertising. U.S. households receive far moreadvertising than letters, bills or other similar matter. Accordingto the Household Diary Study (United States Postal Service 2000),in 1999, 56 percent of the pieces received by U.S. households wereadvertising mail.3An apparent exception is Consignia. It rationalizes its deliverycost by delivering twice a day in most urban areas and once a dayin rural areas.4Italy has a very undeveloped direct mail market and the Italianmonopoly does not include direct mail. TheU.S. monopoly includes all addressed direct mail consisting offewer than 24 pages. The U.S. Postal Service handled 314 pieces percapita of direct mail in 1999.equivalently, the increase in average rates for the volumeremaining.5 Next we introduce the concept of delivery route profitand quantify the relative profits from delivered mail and mail notrequiring delivery in both Italy and the U.S. We then compare thedistribution of profit margins for routes in Italy and the U.S. andthe effect this has on vulnerability to cream skimming. Finally, wediscuss two measures of the cost of universal service, the entrypricing measure and the net avoided cost measure in the context ofdelivery profits. We compare them with our burden measure for thePoste Italiane and the U.S. Postal Service.Our principal findings are:The burden of the USO is much greater for small per capitavolume posts than it is for large and medium per capita volumeposts.The likelihood of a graveyard spiral resulting from volume lossto cream skimmers is remote for medium to large volume per capitaposts; whereas it is a real threat to small volume per capitaposts.The measure of burden presented here combined with thedistribution of route profit margins for Poste Italiane and theU.S. Postal Service yields results contrary to the entry price andnet avoided cost measures for the cost of the USO.The portion of mail not requiring delivery is a very importantcontributor to the finances of a post.2. COMPARATIVE STATISTICSTable 1 contains some statistics for Italy and the U.S. and fortheir postal administrations.6 Italy has 21 percent of the U.S.population and 16 percent (approximately one seventh) of the U.S.per capita volume. Most of the delivery statistics in the table'ssecond section are reasonably close to this 16 percent figure. Thenumber of delivery points in Italy, as a percentage of those in theU.S., is a5To provide a basis for comparing Poste Italiane and the U.S.Postal Service, we use a model of postal operations that followsthe structure of FY 1999 costs in the U.S. Postal Service.Parametric analyses are conducted by varying volume under differentassumptions about the extent that institutional cost varies overthe long run. The model is validated for Poste Italiane by makingadjustments for major differences in the two posts, such as theextent of worksharing.6Prices of goods and services vary between Italy and the UnitedStates, and the prevailing market exchange rate does notnecessarily account for the relative differences in prices. We haveused the Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) of 1,677 liras per U.S.dollar to convert the 1999 Italian statistics reported in Italianliras. The PPP has been produced by the Organization of EconomicCo-Operation and Development (OECD) and shows the number of Italianliras required in 1999 to buy goods and services equivalent to whatcan be purchased with one U.S. dollar. In 1999, the average marketexchange rate, reported by the International Monetary Fund (IMF),was 1,817 liras perU.S. dollar.disproportionately high 25 percent. The disproportionate numberof small business addresses in Italy (Scarfiglieri and ViscoComandini 2001) may help explain this.Poste Italiane also has disproportionately more delivery pointsper route. This results from a much lower coverage (percent ofaddresses receiving mail on a given day), a higher populationdensity and other unexplored route and topographicalconsiderations.7 We see in the fourth section that the U.S. PostalService cost per piece is much lower than Poste Italiane cost perpiece despite having a much higher labor cost per employee. This isprimarily a result of economies of scale, worksharing and theextensive use of automation.8Table 1. Selected National and Postal Statistics for FY1999aItaly as Italy U.S. Percent of U.S. FinallyPopulation 57,679,895 Area (Square Miles) 116,347Population/Square Mile 496 Number of Households 21,211,334272,691,000 21 we note that the 3,675,031 3 74 668 number ofretail 103,620,000 20 units (per100,00042population)3 16operated by17Poste Italiane is16 25much larger14than the number18 21operated by the144U.S. Postal14154Service.24illustrates37 173fact that7USO206This the the hasinItalso illustrates that the concept of the USO has many moredimensions than ubiquitous delivery. However, the cross-subsidythat results from ubiquitous delivery and uniform prices andfrequency of delivery is widely regarded as the most importantaspect of the USO mitigating against liberalization. This paperwill be restricted to dealing with this aspect.7Motorcycles are the primary means of carrier transport in Italyand automobiles are the primary means in the U.S.8It is also the result of the quantity of non-delivered mail (SeeSection 4).3. RELATIVE IMPACT OF VOLUME LOSS ON POSTAL SYSTEMSThe burden of the USO on a postal system lies within its fixedcosts. Ceteris paribus, unit (per piece) fixed costs are higher ina low volume per capita system than in a high volume per capitasystem. We examine the effect of volume on unit total costs.The sensitivity of cost to volume for a postal system can beinvestigated directly provided the ratio of fixed to variable costsis known by function. Some postal administrations do not have thisinformation and some choose not to make it available to regulatorsor the public. Consequently, we have built a model to estimate therelationship between unit average costs and per capita volume. 9The model is described in the appendix and includes parameters forthe portion of variable costs by major postal functions. When theaverage unit cost is graphed as a function of volume per capita oneobtains a curve with a parabolic shape. The exact shape of thecurve depends on the specific set of parameters used to benchmarkthe model, such as the proportion of fixed costs at a specific percapita volume. Because the cost behavior of the U.S. Postal Servicehas been studied extensively and because U.S. postal costs are themost transparent in the industrialized world, we use U.S data from1999 as provided in the most recent omnibus rate proceeding, DocketNo. R2000-1 to benchmark the model10 Table 2 shows the U.S.institutional/variable percentages for the major postalfunctions.Table 2 : U.S. Fixed/Variable Cost By Major Function a (FY1999)aSource: Postal Rate Commission Docket No. R2000-1bDelivery includes in-office and out-of-office costs.Because the U.S. Postal Service may differ greatly from otherpostal systems in labor cost, automation, route topography,worksharing, mix of mail by shape, and the percentage ofnon-delivered mail, etc., we cannot expect the cost estimatesfurnished by the model to be extremely accurate estimates ofparticular non-U.S. systems. For our9We use pieces per capita rather than total volume to normalizethe volume.10This model has been developed on the assumption that the costbehavior of postal administrations is essentially similar. Thefunctions of collection, delivery, transportation, processing andwindow services are common to the postal administrations of allindustrialized countries.purposes we do not need great accuracy, we only need reasonableestimates in order to examine the sensitivity of total unit cost tovolume per capita.The fixed portion of non-delivery costs would be expected tochange as we move from higher volume administrations to lowervolume ones. It would be expected that lower volume postaladministrations would try to keep them small to reduce the burdenon rate payers. Since these costs are variable in the long run andwe do not know how other postal administrations deal with them, weparameterize them for purposes of modeling.As a preliminary matter, using the fixed/variable ratios forU.S. Postal Service costs from Table 2, Figure 1 shows that as percapita volume increases, the mail processing proportion of totalcost will increase and the delivery proportion will decrease. Thisis because mail-processing costs are almost all variable whiledelivery costs have a very large fixed component. Since the U.S.volume per capita is the highest in the world, the U.S. PostalService delivery costs proportion should be the smallest of anypostal service. On the other hand, Poste Italiane per capita volumeis among the lowest in the industrialized world, and so itsdelivery costs proportion should be among the highest.Figure 1: Functional Percentage of Total CostsBenchmarked by U.S. Costs and Volumes with 25% of Non-DeliveryInstitutional Costs Long-Run VariablePercentage of Total Costs706050403020100Pieces per CapitaAgain using the ratios for U.S. Postal Service costs in Table 2,Figure 2 shows the variability of the major functions as per capitavolume changes. It can be seen that at low volumes, mail processingand transportation costs have a high degree of fixity while at highvolumes they are almost all variable.Figure 2: M odeled Variabilities by FunctionB enchm arked by U .S . C o sts and V o lu m es w ith 25% of Non-D elivery Institutional C osts L ong-R un V ariab le0 1 00 200 3 00 400 500 600 700 800P ieces per C apitaFigure 3 shows the impact of per capita volume on average unitcosts. The three curves represent different variabilities ofnon-delivery fixed costs as shown in the legend. It appears thatunit costs are not very sensitive to changes in per capita volumeat the high end but are quite sensitive at the low end. Forexample, a ten-percent reduction in pieces per capita for the U.S.Postal Service would result in costs increasing about one cent. Aten-percent reduction for a post at 100 pieces per capita wouldincrease unit costs by nine cents. The increase in unit costresulting from a ten-percent decrease in per capita volume for arange of volumes is shown in Table 3.Figure 3: Model Estimates of Unit CosBenchmarked by U.S. Costs and VolumesPieces per Capita Long-Run Variability of Non-DeliveryInstitutional CostsIn the per capita volume range of most Northern Europeancountries, Canada, New Zealand and Australia, the effect on unitcost from a ten-percent reduction in per capita volume is notgreat. At about 200 pieces per capita the effect of volume loss onunit cost becomes much more pronounced.11Table 3: Unit Cost with 10% Decrease in Volume Assuming 25% ofNon-Delivery Institutional Costs are Long-Run Variable(1999 U.S. Dollars)Pieces per Capita 700 600 500 400 300 200 100Base unit cost 0.32 0.33 0.36 0.40 0.46 0.59 0.97 Unit cost with10% volume loss 0.33 0.35 0.38 0.42 0.49 0.63 1.06When volume is lost to cream skimmers because of the USO, netrevenue losses (revenue minus cost) must be made up from theremaining volume to maintain breakeven status. The burden measurequantifies the resulting increase in unit cost and revenue thatmust be made up from each piece of mail that remains in the system.An important question is whether the rate increases would lead to agraveyard spiral. We think the burden measure provides an answer tothis question.Insofar as the burden of the USO might introduce a death spiral(Crew and Kleindorfer 2000) owing to the loss of volume because ofliberalization, the probability seems slight until per capitavolumes are in the 100 to 150-piece range. Below that point thepossibility of a death spiral increases rapidly. Thus, we concludethat the burden of the USO is much greater for low per capitavolume posts than for medium to high volume ones.In order to make the model more useful for comparing PosteItaliane and the U.S. Postal Service we adjust model costs toaccount for important known differences. Since worksharingactivities reduce United States costs by about 25 percent (Cohen etal. 2001), we increase model costs to account for the lack ofworksharing in Italy. The portion of the model costs that are laborcosts is adjusted downwards to reflect hourly labor costdifferences between Poste Italiane and the U.S. Postal Service. Inaddition, model costs are adjusted to reflect the Poste Italianeproportion of low-cost letters (and cards), medium-cost flats, andhigh-cost parcels. The appendix describes the adjustment factors.Table 4 shows estimates of Poste Italiane unit costs derived usingthe model.It can be seen that the model comes fairly close to PosteItaliane unit costs. Of course the model could be further refinedto account for many more specific differences. We leave thatproject for another day. Nonetheless, we think the model issufficiently accurate to allow us to draw a major conclusion: theburden of universal service is highly dependent on volume percapita, so policies suitable for liberalizing medium and large percapita volume posts are likely not suitable for small per capitavolume posts.Greece, Italy, Portugal, and Spain have per capita volumes below200.Table 4: Model Estimates of Poste Italiane Unit Costs Based onU.S. Costs and Variabilities Adjusted for Worksharing, WageDifferences, and Mail MixLong-Run Variability Unit Costs ($ per piece) of Non-Delv. Inst.Costs Attributable Institutional Total0% 0.19 0.59 0.78 25 0.19 0.53 0.72 50 0.19 0.47 0.66Actual Unit Cost 0.794. PROFITS FROM DELIVERED AND NON-DELIVERED MAILBecause of the interest in the USO and cross-subsidy within thedelivery system, it is important to define the concept of routeprofit (and loss). We define the profitability of a delivery routeas the revenue generated by the mail delivered on the route minusthe attributable upstream costs of the mail delivered and the totalcost of the route (Cohen et al. 1999). Some mail handled by apostal service does not require delivery; recipients pick up mailfrom post office boxes and large volume recipients pick up mail inbulk from designated counters.12 Non-delivered mail can also beconsidered to have delivery profits in the same manner as deliveredmail.13A postal service has variable and fixed upstream costs as wellas variable and fixed delivery costs. In a breakeven postal servicetotal delivery profits from all routes plus profits fromnon-delivered mail must equal fixed upstream costs.14 Put anotherway, fixed upstream costs minus profits from non-delivered mailmust equal delivery profits.In order to compare profits from delivered and non-deliveredmail in Italy and theU.S. we increase Poste Italiane revenue by 24 percent so that itequals cost and is thus at breakeven.15 Table 5 shows thatnon-delivered mail accounts for a very disproportionate share ofdelivery profits in both posts (and presumably in all posts). Themost obvious reason for this is that non-delivered mail incurs nocarrier delivery cost. In addition, although many delivery routesare highly profitable, losses from unprofitable routes reduce thenet delivery profit from delivered mail.12In the United States, this is frequently called "firm holdout"mail.13Revenue minus attributable upstream costs that includes thesmall amount of costs for non-carrier box or counter deliveryactivities associated with non-delivered mail.14An analogous identity holds for a post at any given profit(loss).15Data in this paper are from 1999. In that year, the U.S. PostalService had profits of $400 million and total revenue of $62.8billion.Table 5: Distribution of Volume and Profits betweenDelivered and Non-delivered Mail(Percent)Italy U.S. Volume Profits Volume ProfitsDelivered 8658 79 33 Non-delivered 1442 21 67Because total delivery profits from delivered and non-deliveredmail must equal fixed upstream costs, non-delivered mail plays animportant role in reducing the revenue needs of a breakeven post.Ceteris paribus, the higher the proportion of non-delivered mail,the lower the rates that a breakeven post must charge. Thus, thehigher the proportion of non-delivered mail, the less opportunitythere is for a cream skimmer to undercut the incumbent.16,17Moreover highly profitable non-delivered mail is much lessvulnerable to diversion.185. DISTRIBUTION OF ROUTE PROFIT MARGINS AND VULNERABILITY TOCREAM SKIMMINGVolumes, revenues and route profits differ widely on routes inboth Italy and theU.S. The uniform pricing constraint of the USO creates creamskimming possibilities because an entrant can target only highlyprofitable routes and charge a price below the uniform price.Consequently, it is not cross-subsidy per se that allows creamskimming. All routes could be above incremental cost and theproblem would still exist. Cream skimming stems from the uniformpricing and service constraints given that routes have disparateprofits, and not necessarily from the need to cross-subsidizeroutes.16We would expect that the USPS's percentage of non-delivered mailto be among the highest of industrialized country posts because theU.S. payment system involves a large fraction of financialtransactions paid by check and mailed to large volume recipients.This mail is generally picked up by them (or their agents) at apost office (i.e., it is non-delivered mail).17In a small per capita volume post, the fixed cost of deliveryrepresents a larger share of total cost than in a large per capitavolume post. Ceteris paribus, per piece profit from non-deliveredmail is greater in a small per capita volume post than in a largeone.18Many of the 18 million boxholders in the United States do notwant mail delivered to their premises. We cannot quantify thenumber, but presumably, this is an important reason why mailrecipients rent a post office box. These box holders would not begood candidates for cream skimmers. Fifty-six percent ofnon-delivered mail is single piece. It is not likely that creamskimmers would be able to successfully put a collection system inplace to capture much of this mail. Of the 44 percent ofnon-delivered mail that remains, 36 percent is First Class, much ofwhich is time sensitive. According to most models of creamskimming, delivery frequency would be reduced. Time sensitive FirstClass would be less likely to make use of a service with lessfrequent delivery. Finally, non-single piece mail addressed to boxholders is being transported and delivered over large areas of thenation. A delivery cream skimmer would have to have a nationalpresence to compete for this mail. This means much of the mailcould not be handled by local niche players or even regional creamskimmers.The more revenue that leaves the system because of creamskimming, the more rates must be increased on the remaining mail tomaintain a breakeven status. Consequently, the greater the share ofsystem-wide revenue that is from high margin routes, the greaterimpact that cream skimming could have on a postal administration.In order to compare the possible effect of cream skimming on theItalian and U.S. postal administrations, we have arrayed theirroutes by profit margin using FY 1999 data. Again, we have adjustedthe Poste Italiane revenue to breakeven in order to facilitatecomparison.Figure 4 displays the profit margin19 of routes arrayed bysemi-deciles. The most profitable Italian semi-decile has a marginof just over 30 percent while the most profitable U.S. semi-decilehas a margin of over 50 percent. However, a greater percentage ofItalian routes are profitable than U.S. routes.We do not know the profit margin that would actually attractcream skimmers. If it is 30 percent, then 10 percent of U.S. routeswould be vulnerable and less than 7 percent of Italian routes wouldbe vulnerable.Virtually all profitable routes in Italy are urban. In the U.S.,only about half of the routes served by city carriers areprofitable while three quarters of the routes served by ruralcarriers are profitable.20 It may well be that competition is muchmore likely to develop in urban areas. If so, Poste Italiane wouldbe at greater risk from cream skimmers than the U.S. PostalService.19For purposes of this discussion, profit margin is defined as theratio of delivery profits to route costs (i.e. upstream variableplus total delivery cost).20In the U.S. about one fifth of the routes served by ruralcarriers are in high-density suburban areas.6050403020Average Profit margin Percentage100(10)(20)(30)(40)(50)(60)1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011121314151617181920Semi-decile (Routes by 5% Increments)aRevenue for Poste Italiane is increased by 24% to createbreakeven conditions.The percent of total revenue by semi-decile is shown in Table 6.At every semidecile except the first, Poste Italiane receives agreater percentage of total revenue than the U.S. Postal Service.This is due to the fact that a much larger percentage of U.S.revenue comes from undelivered mail.The distribution of profitable routes shown on Figure 4indicates that the U.S. Postal Service's revenue (volume) per routeis much more skewed than Poste Italiane's, as measured by therelative size of the bars at the extremes. This would tend to maketheU.S. Postal Service more attractive to cream skimmers than PosteItaliane (at most profit thresholds). This skewness results frommail volume being highly correlated with income and U.S. incomedistribution being much more skewed than Italian incomedistribution. (Berthelemy and Toledano 2000; Kolin and Smith 1999)In fact the U.S. has the most skewed income distribution of anyindustrialized country as measured by the World Bank's Gini Index.The U.S. Gini Index is 40.8 while Italy's is 27.3.21 Thus, Italyshould be fairly typical of the distribution of route profitmargins of industrial countries and the U.S. should be anoutlier."World Development Indicators 2001, Table 2.8" The World Bank,Washington, DC. The unweighted average of Gini Indices forindustrialized countries is 30.6. Austria has the lowest index at23.1.Table 6: Delivered Mail Revenue As Percent of Total RevenueRoutes by Semi-decile (Ranked by Profit) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910Cumulative Percent of Total RevenueU.S. Italy10 10 16 18 21 24 26 30 31 36 35 41 39 46 43 50 46 54 49 58Routes by Semi-decile (Ranked by Profit) 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 1819 20 Cumulative Percent of Total RevenueU.S. Italy53 62 56 66 59 69 61 72 64 74 66 77 69 79 71 81 72 83 73 84Because volume and revenue are highly correlated, if volume islost to cream skimming, then revenue is also lost. Figure 4 andTable 6 can be used to estimate likely profit and revenue losses tocream skimmers and Figure 3 to estimate the cost impact of volumelosses. Depending on the threshold selected, the potential impacton the respective posts can be compared.We doubt that cream skimmers could capture even a majority ofthe volume on any route owing to the limited amount of contestablevolume in the U.S. and perhaps other countries.22 Nevertheless, tothe extent that volume would be lost to cream skimmers, the impacton Poste Italiane would be greater than on the U.S. PostalService.As mentioned above, the Italian data have been adjusted forbreakeven. Had we not done this, very few Italian routes would beprofitable. A postal service that is below breakeven will be lessattractive to cream skimmers than otherwise. On the other hand, ifa postal service is above breakeven, its routes will be even moreprofitable and hence, more attractive to cream skimmers.6. ENTRY PRICINGThe entry pricing measure defines the cost of the USO as the sumof lost profits from entry by a competitor. The form of entry thatwe consider is delivery cream skimming. If an entrant were moreefficient than the incumbent, then the USO would not cause the lostprofit. Under the restrictive definition of the USO, however, it ispossible for the incumbent post to be more efficient than theentrant and still lose profits because the incumbent must charge auniform price. The entrant would most likely attack routes withmuch higher than average profit margins. The incumbent would not beable toCohen et al. (2000) found that less than 16 percent of totalU.S. Postal Service volume is contestable.respond because of the restrictive USO. Ceteris paribus, themore skewed the incumbent's route profit margin distribution, themore vulnerable the post is to entry.23Figure 4 shows that the Poste Italiane profit margindistribution is much less skewed than the U.S. Postal Service'sdistribution. Thus, according to the entry price measure the costof the USO is higher in the U.S. than in Italy.24 This is contraryto the conclusion that we have drawn in Section 3 (i.e., that theburden of the USO is much higher for Poste Italiane than for theU.S. Postal Service).The possibility of an equal or less efficient entrant capturingsignificant volume depends on the fraction of mail on profitableroutes that is actually contestable. Given the huge scale economiesof a universal service provider and the limited amount ofcontestable mail, it is very difficult for an entrant, at least inthe U.S., to charge prices lower than an incumbent (Cohen et al.1999).7. NET AVOIDED COSTThe net avoided cost measure (NAC) of the USO is the sum of thelosses from unprofitable routes (Dobbs and Golay 1995; Elsenblastand Stumpf 1995). As stated earlier, the profits from delivered andnon-delivered mail must equal the upstream fixed cost in abreakeven post. If the profits from the money making routes andnon-delivered mail exceed the upstream fixed cost, then there mustbe an offset of money losing routes. This is simply an accountingidentity. The more skewed the distribution of delivery route profitmargins, the greater will be the losses from unprofitable routes.Figure 4 shows that the NAC would be greater for the U.S. PostalService than for Poste Italiane (assuming adjustments for scale).Again, this is contrary to our finding in Section 3 about therelative burden of the USO.Furthermore, we believe that the logic of the NAC measure isflawed. Suppose that a government decides to provide a subsidy toits breakeven postal service to offset losses on unprofitableroutes because it wishes taxpayers and not rate payers to fund theUSO. The postal service would then have a surplus. In order for thepostal service to return to breakeven, prices would be reduced. 25Because of the price reduction unprofitable routes would becomeeven more unprofitable and some formerly profitable routes wouldbecome unprofitable. Because the total losses from unprofitableroutes are greater than before, the government would have toincrease its subsidy.23For purposes of the discussion of entry pricing and net avoidedcost, we ignore the impact of the percentage of non-deliveredmail.24Bradley and Colvin (2000) estimated the entry pricing cost ofthe USO for the United States. That estimate assumed that theentrant would capture all volume on all profitable routes. It is aworst case scenerio.25The same logic would hold for a postal service earning any givenprofit (loss).This process would continue until there is but one route notsubsidized by the government and that route would be the route thatinitially was the most profitable one in the system. Thus, the netavoided cost measure implies the absurdity that a government mustfund the entire delivery network if it wants to fund the cost ofuniversal service.8. CONCLUSIONWe introduce and quantify the concept of the burden of the USO,which is the upward impact on unit costs that would result fromcompetitive entry. We find that the burden on low per capita postalsystems is much greater than on medium to high volume postalsystems. This is contrary to results obtained when using the netavoided cost or entry pricing measures of the cost of the USO. Wealso find that the burden decreases as the percentage ofnon-delivered mail increases. The distribution of route profits ismuch more skewed for the U.S. Postal Service than for PosteItaliane. This would tend to make the U.S. more attractive topotential cream skimmers. On the other hand, a greater percentageof Poste Italiane revenue is generated by delivered mail, and thiswould cause cream skimming to have a greater impact on its unitcosts.APPENDIXModel Definition.The model is designed to define average unit cost as a functionof volume (Q), based on the USPS cost structure for FY 1999.AC = TC / (Q * P)where:TC = DC + NDCDC = (Vd / Q0) Q + FdNDC = (Vnd / Q0) Q + [ (Ev Fnd) / Q0 ] Q + (1 - Ev) FndThe functions can be combined and expressed as:TC = { [ V + (Ev Fnd) ] / Q0 } Q + Fd + (1 - Ev) FndThe terms are defined as:AC = Average Unit Cost d = Subscript that indicates deliverycomponent of a cost or volume DC = Total Delivery Cost Ev =Long-run variability of non-delivery institutional (fixed)costs.Parametric values of 0, 0.25 and 0.5 used in analysis. F = USPSFixed Cost for FY 1999 nd = Subscript that indicates non-deliverycomponent of a cost or volume NDC = Total Non-Delivery Cost P =1999 U.S. Population Q = Quantity (Volume) per capita Q0 = USPSVolume per capita for FY 1999 TC = Total Cost V = USPS VariableCost for FY 1999Adjustments for differences between the USPS and PosteItalianeSignificant differences in the composition of mail and laborcosts exist between USPS and Poste Italiane. To make the comparisonof the unit cost from our model (which is based on USPS cost data)and the actual unit cost of Poste Italiane more meaningful, weapply three factors to the results of our model. The unit costassuming 25% of institutional (fixed) costs vary with volume in thelong run is calculated in the example.1.First, the attributable (variable) cost from the model(V/Q0*P = $0.194) is adjusted to reflect the different shape mix ofmail handled by Poste Italiane. The proportions of letters (88%)and nonletters (12%) for Poste Italiane are applied to the USPSvariable unit cost of each (13.46 and 26.60 cents, respectively).The weighted average unit cost that results (15.04 cents) is thendivided by the actual USPS unit variable unit cost of 16.88 cents.The resulting ratio (0.891) is applied to the variable cost fromthe model.Example: 0.194 * 0.891 = $0.1732.Next, the resulting variable cost is adjusted to accountfor the savings from worksharing reflected in the USPS costs, whichdo not exist for Poste Italiane. The USPS variable costs in FY 1999were 40% lower than they would have been without worksharing,(Cohen et al. 2001) so the variable cost from step one ($0.173) isincreased by that amount.Example: $0.173 * 1.4 = $0.2423.Finally, both variable and institutional costs areadjusted for labor cost differences. Since 78.6% of USPS costs arelabor costs, that portion of the variable cost from step two($0.242) and institutional cost from the model ($0.662) is adjustedby the ratio of Poste Italiane labor costs to those of USPS(74.7%).Example: [ (0.786) ($0.242 + $0.662) (0.747) ] + [ (1 - 0.786)($0.242 + $0.662) ] = $0.724REFERENCESBerthlmy, Francoise L., and Jolle Toledano. 2000. "In France,Mail Goes Where the Money and Businesses Are." In CurrentDirections in Postal Reform, edited by Michael A. Crew and Paul R.Kleindorfer. Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.Bradley, Michael D., and Jeff Colvin. 2000. "Measuring the Costof Universal Service for Posts." In Current Directions in PostalReform, edited by Michael A. Crew and Paul R. Kleindorfer. Boston,MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.Cohen, Robert H., William W. Ferguson, John D. Waller, andSpyros S. Xenakis. 1999. "An Analysis of the Potential for CreamSkimming in the United States Residential Delivery Market." InEmerging Competition in Postal and Delivery Services, edited byMichael A. Crew and Paul R. Kleindorfer. Boston, MA: KluwerAcademic Publishers.Cohen, Robert H., William W. Ferguson, John D. Waller, andSpyros S. Xenakis. 2000. "Universal Service without a Monopoly." InCurrent Directions in Postal Reform, edited by Michael A. Crew andPaul R. Kleindorfer. Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.Cohen, Robert H., William W. Ferguson, John D. Waller and SpyrosS. Xenakis. 2001 "The Impact of Using Worksharing to Liberalize aPostal Market." Papers presented at Wissenschaftliches Institut frKommunikationsdienste GmbH, 6th Kenigswinter Seminar on PostalEconomics, Liberalization of Postal Markets.Crew, Michael A., and Paul R. Kleindorfer. 2000. "Liberalizationand the Universal Service Obligation in Postal Service." In CurrentDirections in Postal Reform, edited by Michael A. Crew and Paul R.Kleindorfer. Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.Dobbs, Ian, and Jeanne Golay. 1995. "Universal ServiceObligation and Reserved Sector." In Cost of Universal Service,edited by Ulrich Stumpf and Wolfgang Elsenbast. Papers presented atthe 3rd Knigswinter Seminar, WIK Proceedings.Elsenblast, Wolfgang, and Ulrich Stumpf. 1995. "The Cost ofUniversal Service Obligations in a Competitive Environment." Paperspresented at the 3rd Knigswinter Seminar. WissenschaftlichesInstitut fr Kommunikationsdienste.Kolin, Marshall and Edward J. Smith. 1999. "Mail Goes Where theMoney Is: A Study of Rural Mail Delivery in the United States." InEmerging Competition in Postal and Delivery Services, edited byMichael A. Crew and Paul R. Kleindorfer. Boston, MA: KluwerAcademic Publishers.Panzar, John C. 2001. "Funding Universal Service Obligations:The Costs of Liberalization." In Future Directions in PostalReform, edited by Michael A. Crew and Paul R. Kleindorfer. Boston,MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.Rodriguez, Frank, Stephen Smith and David Storer. 1999."Estimating the Cost of the Universal Service Obligation in PostalService." In Emerging Competition in Postal and Delivery Services,edited by Michael A. Crew and Paul R. Kleindorfer. Boston, MA:Kluwer Academic Publishers.Scarfiglieri, Gennaro, and Vincenzo Visco Comandini. 2000."Postal Profits Arise where People Are." In Future Directions inPostal Reform, edited by Michael A. Crew and Paul R. Kleindorfer.Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.United States Postal Service. 2000. "The Household Diary Study,Fiscal Year 1999." Volume 1.