A MEASURE OF SCALE ECONOMIES FOR POSTAL SYSTEMSROBERT H. COHENU. S. POSTAL RATE COMMISSIONEDWARD H. CHUU.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCYPUBLISHED IN MANAGING CHANGE IN THE POSTAL DELIVERY INDUSTRIES,ED. MICHAEL A. CREW AND PAUL R. KLEINDORFER, KLUWER ACADEMICPUBLISHERS, 1997THE VIEWS EXPRESSED IN THIS PAPER ARE THOSE OF THE AUTHORS ANDDO NOT NECESSARILY REPRESENT THE OPINIONS OF THE POSTAL RATECOMMISSION OR THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY. MR. CHU WAS APROFESSIONAL STAFF MEMBER OF THE POSTAL RATE COMMISSION FROM1993-1995. A PRELIMINARY VERSION OF THIS PAPER WAS PRESENTED ATWISSENSCHAFTLICHES INSTITUT FR KOMMUNIKATIONSDIENSTE (WIK) GMHH,3RD KNIGSWINTER SEMINAR, COST OF UNIVERSAL SERVICE, NOVEMBER1995.IntroductionThe delivery function is comparatively new to modern postalservices. Originally the post was simply an inter-city letterservice. One could deposit a letter at the post office in a cityfor transportation to the post office in another city where therecipient would call for it.1 It was not until the mid-nineteenthcentury that city delivery began on a regular basis in the U.S. Bythe end of the century rural delivery was started on a limitedbasis, but it did not become ubiquitous until the early part of thetwentieth century.Delivery changed the post in many ways. No doubt it has been asubstantial cause of the tremendous growth in volume since itsinception. But delivery also changed the economics of the modernpost because it introduced a large amount of fixed costs.While the letter mail monopoly preceded the introduction ofdelivery service, the fixed costs associated with delivery underliethe two modern justifications for the letter monopoly. First, it isargued that a letter mail monopoly is necessary to assure universalservice at a uniform price. Second, it is argued that delivery is anatural monopoly and that legal protection is necessary to prevent"cream skimming" and thereby to maximize the benefit of theuniversal delivery system.2 The first argument is a political onewhich presumes significant urban-rural cross subsidizes indelivery. The second is an economic argument which presumes thatthe Postal Service as a monopolist is an efficient provider ofdelivery. The analysis presented here is an attempt to address thesecond argument.1Campbell, James I., Jr., "An Introduction to the History of thePostal Monopoly Law in the United States," The Last Monopoly, TheCATO Institute, Washington, D.C., 1996.2For purposes of this paper, "cream skimming" refers toconcentration on serving only those markets that exhibitlower-than-average delivery costs, regardless of the characteristicthat causes those costs to be less than average. Suchcharacteristics are not confined to network density and couldinclude favorable geographic, demographic, or operationalcharacteristics. For example, in the U.S., curb delivery is lesscostly than park and loop delivery which is less costly than footdelivery.In an unsubsidized postal system as in the United States, thepostal customer bears all costs of the system. The customertherefore is the beneficiary where return to scale are maximized byhaving a single firm (a monopoly) provide delivery. On the otherhand, monopolies can be harmful to consumers when they protecttechnically inefficient behavior, and allow economic rents to beextracted.3 This paper sets up a framework to examine the followingquestion: Do the economies of scale in the delivery function exceedthe technical inefficiencies and economic rents of the PostalService? In short, does the monopoly increase or decrease the priceof postal services to postal customers?4This paper measures the returns to scale of the U.S. deliveryfunction. It then compares this benefit with the cost that themonopoly imposes on the consumer.Because delivery involves so much fixed cost, it would create atremendous barrier to entry even if the legal monopoly wereabolished. Thus, it may be that having once enjoyed a de juremonopoly, national posts would enjoy a de facto monopoly even ifthe legal one were abolished. 5 This paper provides aquantification of the barrier to entry in the letter mail market inthe United States caused by high fixed costs in the deliveryfunction.This paper next estimates the value of scale in deliveryexhibited by 21 national postal systems based on data from anunpublished paper which was presented at the 1994 Stockholmconference on Postal and Delivery Services.6 7 Finally, it comparesthe estimated value of scale with an estimate of the wage premiumin each country.3It is also claimed that monopolies harm consumers with lowerquality of service and by being less innovative than firms whichmust compete.4It is important to distinguish postal consumers (i.e., payingcustomers) from recipients of mail. The latter may derive greatbenefits from a monopoly in the form of services that would not beprovided in a competitive postal environment. These might be calledpolitical rents. Consumers, being forced to underwrite thepolitical rents and any inefficiencies and economic rents in thesystem, may be better off in a competitive environment.5This may well be the case in Sweden which abolished its monopolyin 1993. A letter mail competitor began operations in Stockholmwhere it captured 20 percent of the market, but, nonetheless,failed.6"An Exploratory Quantitative Comparison of PostalAdministrations in Industrial Countries."7The data for each country is from 1988 and is based on UPUstatistics which have been verified and revised as necessary basedon communications with officials in most of the countries.The Uniqueness of the Delivery FunctionWe distinguish what is known in the U.S. as the "in-office"delivery function and the street delivery function. The former isan extension of mail processing; it is where the mail is sortedinto the delivery sequence. "Delivery function" as used in thispaper refers to street delivery.Recent empirical research confirms the widely held belief thateconomies of scale exist in the delivery of mail.8 Other functionalcomponents of the Postal Service are presumed here not to exhibitsignificant scale economies, although this has not beendemonstrated.John Panzar has characterized street delivery as a bottleneckfunction because a single firm can deliver to a recipient at alower total cost than multiple firms delivering to the samecustomer. He suggests that processing and transportation of mail donot seem to be characterized by scale economies, and that theycould be provided by competing firms. Under this scenario, hesuggests that rates be set to allow nondiscriminatory access to themonopoly delivery service by the firms competing in processing andtransportation.9The Postal Rate Commission and the U.S. Postal Service haveimplicitly recognized the absence of significant scale economies inmail processing and transportation functions in the PostalService's rate structure. Postal rates in theU.S. allow for a substantial degree of competition with thePostal Service in mailprocessing and transportation. For example,the U.S. Postal Service gives sorting and barcoding discounts toabout 40 percent of First-Class letter volume. Mailers performabout 60 percent of this worksharing, while third parties performthe8"Natural Monopoly and Technological Agnosticism: The Case of theU.S. Postal Service," MichaelD. Bradley and Jeff Colvin, June, 1995.9Panzar, John, "Competition, Efficiency, and the VerticalStructure of Postal Services," Regulation and the Nature of Postaland Delivery Services, Ed. Michael A. Crew and Paul R. Kleindorfer,Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1993.rest.10 11 In some classes, mailers transport much of their mailto downstream locations to take advantage of zoned rates fortransportation.Street Delivery CostWhile the Postal Service collects extensive data on the costbehavior of city delivery carriers, it collects little data on thecost behavior of rural carriers12 For purposes of this analysis, weassume throughout that rural delivery cost behavior is similar tothat of city delivery.13 In the U.S., street delivery costs forrural and city carriers combined comprises 21 percent of totalcosts. See Table 1.Table 1 USPS Operational Costs by Major FunctionNote: Nonoperating costs, such as payments made to the Treasuryfor retroactive charges are excluded.10These third-party sorters collect mail from mailers, sort andapply barcodes, and deliver the mail to the Postal Service for aportion of the discount. In addition, discounts encourage bulkadvertising mailers to sort their mail all the way to the carrier'swalk sequence, thereby avoiding the carrier "in-office"function.11Economic rents in the form of a wage premium paid by the U.S.Postal Service partially explain why mailers and third parties cansort mail at a lower cost than the Postal Service. When thirdparties compete with the Postal Service, however, in highlyautomated operations such as applying barcodes with opticalcharacter readers and sorting barcoded mail, a wage premium wouldseemingly not be a very significant factor.12The U.S. Postal Service has two types of delivery personnel;city delivery carriers and rural carriers. In 1993, there were 164thousand city delivery routes with 80 million delivery points and49 thousand rural routes with 23 million delivery points. Ruralcosts were 20 percent of total delivery costs.13For example, it is assumed that the ratio of rural carrierin-office cost to total rural carrier cost is the same as the ratioof city carrier in-office cost to total city carrier cost.This paper adopts the analysis of street delivery costspresented by the U.S. Postal Service in several rate proceedingsover the past 20 years. That analysis disaggregates street deliverytime into three subcomponents: route time, access time, and loadtime. "Route time" is the time it would take a carrier to walk ordrive the route, passing, but not accessing, any delivery point."Access time" is the time it takes a carrier to deviate from theroute in order to make a delivery. This may mean departing from thebasic line of travel and walking or driving to a delivery point andreturning to the basic line of travel, or it may mean slowing downfrom normal driving speed, stopping to make a delivery to acurbside mail receptacle, and then resuming normal speed. Finally,"load time" is the time it takes a carrier to place the mail in amail receptacle. 14 Table 2 disaggregates street time in theU.S.Table 2Note: For simplicity, coverage-related load time ($1,232million) is included in access time, and street support is"piggybacked" on all three functions.Route time costs are essentially fixed, while access is partlyvariable, andload time is 100 percent variable with volume. The analysis ofvariability of accesstime involves estimating the number of new accesses that wouldbe caused by anincrement of volume. In the U.S., approximately 93 percent ofall possible stopsreceive mail each delivery day. 15 Consequently, the number ofnew accesses14Load time is divided into elemental and coverage related loadtime. Elemental load time varies with the number of pieces beingloaded. Coverage related load time is the fixed portion of loadtime at a stop; it varies with the number of stops. Thus, it ispartly variable and partly fixed.15A stop consists of one or more possible deliveries. For example,a 5 unit apartment house with a cluster of 5 mail boxes would beone stop and 5 possible deliveries.caused by an increase in volume would be small. Regressionanalysis of carrier street data indicates that at the currentvolume, the variability of access cost is about 6 percent. In otherwords, a 10 percent increase in volume will yield a0.6 percent increase in the number of accesses.The Postal Service regularly collects a representative sample ofstreet delivery costs, volumes, and delivery point characteristicsfor city delivery carriers. The Postal Service's FY 1993 data setcontains observations from about 300 routes.16 Observed every twoweeks over a one year period, data is collected from about 270,000stops. This data is used to model the behavior of access costs.The coverage function shown in Figure 1 models the change in thepercentage of possible stops that are accessed on a route as aresult of changes in volume. 17 Marginal access cost can beestimated from the coverage function. As volume per stop grows andcoverage approaches 100 percent, the volume variability of accesscost approaches zero. As the volume per stop declines, coveragedeclines, and the volume variability of access costs rises.Measure of Scale EconomiesOur methodology for measuring scale economies essentiallycompares the cost of providing delivery by a single firm with thecost of providing delivery by two firms.18 We measure the returnsto scale in the U.S. postal delivery function by first determiningthe total cost of delivery provided by the Postal Service. Next, wedetermine the total cost of delivery performed by the incumbent anda second firm that is assumed to be equally efficient. We assumethat the two firms share the market equally, each delivering arandom half of the mail. Further, each firm serves16See the testimony of U.S. Postal Service witness Bradley inDocket No. R94-1 (USPS-T-5) at pp. 5-10.17The Postal Service developed the coverage function and firstused it in the Docket No. R76-1 rate case. For this paper we havealtered the Service's model slightly. Unlike the Postal Service'smodel, all stop types and mail classes are consolidated.18Of course, the cost of providing delivery by a single firm couldalso be compared with the cost of three or more firms. This wouldsimply inflate the measure of scale economies.the entire country each delivery day. Thus, each firm would haveto incur the same route time costs that the incumbent currentlyincurs. Since each firm will have only half the volume, the numberof accesses by each firm will be less than the incumbent currentlyexperiences. The number of total accesses by the two firms will,however, be greater than the total experienced by the incumbentalone. This is because some stops receiving multiple pieces willreceive delivery from both firms. We assume here that both firmsprovide the same frequency of delivery (daily).19Since route time is essentially fixed,20 it would double withtwo firms providing service, each with half the volume. Conversely,because load time is 100 percent variable with volume, it would notchange, since total volume is assumed not to change. Access costwould fall somewhere in between, since it is partly variable andpartly fixed. Access cost variability is estimated from thecoverage function shown in Figure 1. Under the duopoly scenariodescribed, it would grow by 61 percent. Given these responses tovolume, total street time cost would increase from $10 billion to$16.1 billion. The difference, $6.1 billion, represents an upperbound on the benefits from scale economies of delivery.21Monopoly Rents and InefficienciesIn 1993, the average U.S. postal worker subject to collectivebargaining received $35,001 in pay and allowances, and anadditional $7,713 in fringe benefits.22 To put these earnings intoperspective, the median annual earnings19A niche incumbent might provide delivery less frequently or to asubset of possible stops. These would be special cases of the moregeneral case analyzed here.20The slight variability the Commission has found in route time isignored here for convenience.21Ceteris paribus, less efficient postal services do not havegreater scale economies than more efficient ones. Theoreticallyscale economies in delivery are not firm specific. They are aproduct of the territory served and the current state of technologywhich would be employed by an efficient firm. The $6.1 billionfigure is inflated by any inefficiency and/or wage premium whichcharacterize theU.S. Postal Service and in that sense it is an upper bound.22The fringe benefit figure excludes unfunded civil serviceretirement liability, certain annuitant benefits, workerscompensation, unemployment compensation, repriced annual leave,bonuses and awards.(without fringe benefits) was $24,076 for full-time U.S. workersin that year.23 Michael B. Wachter of the University ofPennsylvania and his colleagues conclude that there is a wage andfringe benefit premium for the postal bargaining labor force of29.5 percent with respect to comparable workers in the privatesector.24 Such a wage premium would amount to $9 billion inmonopoly rents for the entire postal system. Wachter's $9 billionsystem-wide wage premium exceeds the $6.1 billion delivery scaleeconomy by $2.9 billion. Wachter's wage premium for the deliverynetwork alone, however, amounts to only $2.3 billion which is $3.8billion less than the value of the scale benefit from delivery.Unlike labor costs, technical inefficiency of the Postal Servicehas not been analyzed. There is, however, some indirect evidence ofinefficiencies in the Postal Service. Since 1970, total factorproductivity has increased at an average annual rate of only 0.4percent. This is in spite of the fact that little mechanizationexisted in the Postal Service prior to 1970 and large amounts wereadded in the 1970s. Beginning in the early 1980s and continuing tothe present, about $5 billion has been invested to automated mailprocessing, including the in-office carrier sequence function andforwarding for undeliverable-as-addressed mail. Additional billionshave been invested in buildings, in part to house the automation.In spite of this investment, productivity appears to have increasedonly in response to hiring freezes, or reductions in the averagewage and fringe benefit package caused by special circumstances. 252623 Statistical abstracts of the U.S., Table 665, 1994.24"The Comparability of U.S. Postal Service Wages and Benefits tothe Private Sector: Evidence from the Total Compensation Premium,New Hire Increases, Quit Rates and Application Rates," Michael LWachter, Barry T. Hirsch, and James W. Gillula, July 10, 1995. Dr.Wachter has published a number of studies on the Postal Service'slabor costs under contract to the USPS. Critics of previous Wachterstudies claim that they ignore the fact that the Postal Servicepays minorities the same as it pays white males. The critics arguethat it is the Postal Service's minority employees (not white maleemployees) who earn more than their private sector equivalents, andthis only means that the Postal Service does not discriminate. 25See "A study of U.S. Postal Service Productivity and ItsMeasurement," Staff Study of the Postal Rate Commission, May 9,1990.26Other indications of inefficiency are management claims thatwork rules are unnecessarily restrictive and that 73,075 grievanceswere filed by employees in FY 1995 and not resolved at the locallevel. In addition, the Postal Service has failed to capture alarge market share in two areas of direct competition with theprivate sector which are relatively unaffected by the PrivateExpress Statutes; Parcel Post and Express (overnight) Mail. Thismay have been in part caused by either a wage premium or technicalinefficiencies or a combination of both. The Postal Service arguesthat aFigure 2 presents the consumer benefit from delivery scaleeconomies net of inefficiencies which are expressed as a percentageof total postal costs. The top curve incorporates any wage premiumthe Postal Service may have, the bottom curve nets out Wachter's29.5 percent wage premium. The top curve shows that if the PostalService has 0 percent inefficiencies with its current wage premium,the measure of scale economies equal $6.1 billion. If the PostalService were about 13 percent inefficient, there would be zero netscale benefit. The bottom curve shows that at 0 percentinefficiencies, the net scale benefit is -$2.9 billion if the valueof scale is adjusted for Wachter's wage premium. Any inefficiencywould exacerbate the loss. If the wage premium is accuratelycalculated by Professor Wachter, it would be difficult to defendthe U.S. postal monopoly on purely economic grounds. Moreover,understanding the net economic cost of the monopoly allows one tosee how much universal service costs postal customers, at leastunder current institutional arrangements.Figure 3 presents the same information considering the streetfunction alone. Wachter's wage premium amounts to only $2.3 billionfor the delivery function alone. Thus, the net scale benefit isinitially positive, whether or not we adjust for the wagepremium.It is far more likely that a monopoly for delivery alone wouldproduce net benefits for consumers than would a monopoly thatincluded processing and transportation as well as delivery. Thisresult lends support to the Panzar's suggestion of openingprocessing and transportation to competition while maintaining amonopoly in delivery.lack of pricing flexibility has contributed to the PostalService's failure. Others argue that the quality of service,product features, and underlying cost of these Postal Service'sofferings make them uncompetitive.Barriers to EntryBecause a large proportion of street costs are fixed,27 the unit(per piece) street cost initially declines rapidly as volumeincreases and continues to decline at a decreasing rate. A firmwith a small share of total volume that competes with an incumbentin delivery only, will find its unit cost high relative to theincumbent, even if the competitor pays no wage premium and or ismore efficient. A competitor can reduce its fixed costs by reducingthe level of service (i.e., deliver less frequently than theincumbent). Many First-Class mailers do not require daily deliveryand most advertising mailers do not require daily delivery.While it may be politically difficult, incumbent postaladministrations have the possibility of reducing deliveryfrequency. Table 3 displays the cost savings if theU.S. Postal Service were to reduce delivery frequency. Thesavings are substantial relative to the current $10 billiondelivery costs. They are not so substantial when considered in thecontext of the total Postal Service expenditure in 1993 of $48billion.Table 3 Cost of Delivery FrequencyTable 4 illustrates how difficult it would be to enter the U.S.delivery market.28The table displays the market share that a competitor would haveto capture in order27In the U.S., about 71 percent of street cost are fixed.28Over and above the problems discussed here, the U.S. mail boxlaw represents a huge barrier to entry. The law forbids any privateparty from placing anything in a receptacle used to deliver mail toa residence or business.to have the same unit costs as the U.S. Postal Service. Forexample, if a competitor delivered six days a week and its combinedwage and efficiency advantage is 50 percent, the competitor wouldhave to capture 35 percent of the total market in order to have thesame unit delivery cost as the Postal Service. Even if thiscompetitor delivered only one day per week, it would have tocapture 15 percent of the total market in order to have the sameunit delivery cost as the Postal Service on a national basis. Thisis about 27 billion pieces per year or 519 million pieces per week.Assuming a competitor would capture volume slowly and would have tocharge rates no higher than the incumbent, the competitor wouldhave to be ready to sustain large loses before it could break even.Thus, the effects of economies of scale in delivery presentsignificant barriers to entry.Table 4 Break-Even Market Share for CompetitorsCompetitor Combined Wage and Efficiency AdvantageAn International Comparison of the Values of Scale in Deliverywith Wage PremiumsAs mail volume increases in postal systems, variable costs(processing and transportation) increase and fixed costs decreaseas a percentage of total costs. Therefore, street delivery costs,which are largely fixed, decrease as a percentage of total costs asvolume increases. Route time cost, which is a fixed cost and thelargest component of street delivery costs, decreases with a risein volume. The fixed access cost as a percentage of total costwould increase with volume until all stops are covered while thevariable access cost percentage decreases as volume increases.Figure 4 shows these relationships for the U.S. Postal Servicecosts.Conversely as volumes decrease, fixed costs become a higherpercentage of total costs. For example, if the U.S. Postal Servicevolume were one third of the 1993 level, then delivery costs as apercentage of total costs would increase from approximately 21percent to 36 percent of total costs. In equally efficient butsmaller volume postal systems, street delivery costs should also bea much greater percentage of total costs than the 21 percent in theU.S. Postal Service.Table 5 displays the implied coverage, the percentage of totalcost represented by street delivery cost, and the percentage oftotal cost represented by fixed delivery cost for the 21 countriesbased on their respective per capita volume in 1988. 29 Forexample, Germany had about 230 pieces per capita which yields acoverage of about 64 percent. Its per capita volume andcorresponding coverage imply that its fixed portion of deliveryequaled about 19 percent of its total costs. The U.S., bycomparison, had about 535 pieces per capita and had 91 percentcoverage for 1988. Thus, the fixed portion of delivery in the U.S.amounted to about 14 percent of total cost. The implied coveragesrange from 16 percent to nearly 100 percent. The impliedproportions of fixed delivery cost tot total cost ranged from 12percent to 43 percent.This assumes that the coverage function (Figure 1), developedfrom an analysis of delivery routes in the U.S., is valid for theother countries included in this analysis.Table 5 Fixed Delivery CostsNote: Assumes fixed costs are incurred only in the deliveryfunction. All other functions are assumed to vary with volume.For each of the 21 countries in the international data setdescribed above, we calculate the value of scale in the deliveryfunction using the same approach we used for the U.S. with a slightmodification. For the U.S., we calculate the value of scale bycomparing the cost of a hypothetical duopoly with the cost of amonopoly. This is calculated using volume per possible stops dataand the coverage function. For the other 20 countries, we use aslightly different approach because detailed street delivery costand point of delivery data are not available. We use volume percapita as a proxy for pieces per possible stop and assume that thestreet delivery cost to total cost relationship of the U.S. is thesame for the other 20 countries. See the Technical Appendix for amore detailed discussion of the methodology.Using the 1988 data, we use the per capita volume for eachcountry to approximate pieces per possible stop. We assume a directlinear relationship between volume per capita and pieces perpossible stop. Using the estimates of pieces per possible stop foreach country, we then calculate the monopoly and the duopoly costsbased on the U.S. costs. We then take the ratio of the value ofscale to the monopoly cost and multiply that ratio by the actualtotal costs for each country to estimate the value of scale foreach country.For example, for the United Kingdom, the value of scale is about$4.46 billion using the U.S. model. In 1988, the total cost for thePostal Service was about $36.5 billion. When we adjust the totalcost for the United Kingdom's coverage level, the total cost wouldbe about $26.7 billion. If we assume that all cost segments otherthan street delivery vary with volume, the value of scale is about17 percent of the total cost at the United Kingdom's volume andcoverage levels. We then apply the 17 percent estimate to theUnited Kingdom's actual total cost for 1988 ($6.58 billion) tocalculate the value of scale.30 The value of scale for the UnitedKingdom is about $1.1 billion. Table 6 displays the estimates ofvalue of scale for the 21 countries in our data set. The value ofscale ranges from $14 million for Luxembourg to $4.5 billion forthe U.S.A measure of a wage premium can be calculated for each countryby comparing the postal hourly wage with the average manufacturingwage in that country.31 It should be noted that Belgium, Finlandand Spain have a negative wage premium according to this measure.The net value of scale is the difference between the value of scaleand the wage premium.30The total costs for national postal systems other than the U.S.are expressed in purchasing power parities.31The postal data for calculating the wage premium comes from theabove mentioned paper. The private sector data comes fromInternational Comparisons of Hourly Compensation Costs forProduction Workers in Manufacturing, 1993, U.S. Department ofLabor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Report 873, June 1994.Table 6 Comparison of Value of Scale in Delivery with the WagePremium in 21 National Postal Systems ($ millions - 1988)Note: Expressed in U.S. dollars based on purchasing powerparities.If the wage premium measure is valid, then seven countries havea wage premium alone which exceeds the value of scale in thedelivery function; Australia, Austria, France, Japan, Luxembourg,Switzerland and the United States.In these countries, it appears that it would be difficult tojustify a postal delivery monopoly based on economic grounds.Better understanding of inefficiencies in national postal systemswould allow further evaluation of the economic basis for the postalmonopoly in the remaining countries.32Sweden and Finland do not have legal monopolies.TECHNICAL APPENDIXA. Estimating the Coverage Function1. DataWe use the FY 1993 data from the Postal Service's City CarrierSystem (CCS) to model the behavior of access costs. The CCS database contains a representative sample of street delivery costs,volumes, and delivery point characteristics for city deliverycarriers. The CCS FY 1993 data set contains observations from about300 routes. The Postal Service sampled each route every two weeksover a one year period resulting in about 8,000 route-levelobservations.2. The Coverage ModelFor this paper, we use a nonlinear regression model thatestablishes the relationship between volume and coverage. We define"coverage" as the percentage of stops on a route that receive mail.It has been well established that route coverages relate directlyto the fixed and variable nature of access cost. The coverage modelspecification is as follows:COVi = 1 - e -b*PPSi (1)where, COVi = ASi / PSi ASi = Number of actual stops on route iPSi = Number of possible stops on route i PPSi = Number of piecesper possible stop on route iSince coverage cannot exceed 100 percent, we have specified anexponential function. The regression results from the model arehighly significant. The estimated coefficient, b, is 0.6587.B. Measure of Scale Economies1. Scale Economies for the U.S.We measure the returns to scale in the U.S. postal deliveryfunction by first determining the total cost of delivery providedby the Postal Service:SCm = RCm + ECm + fm * ACm + vm * ACm (2)where,SCm = street delivery costRCm = route time costECm = elemental load costACm = access cost (also includes coverage-related load cost)vm = variable portion of access cost = ((e -b*PPS * (b * PPS) /(1 - e -b*PPS))) fm = fixed portion of access cost = (1 - vm) m =designates the monopoly caseFor the year 1993, street delivery cost totaled about $10.07billion:SCm = RCm + ECm + fm * ACm + vm * ACm (2)= 2.95 + 1.91 + 0.8 (5.20) + 0.2 (5.20)= 10.07Next, we determine the total cost of delivery performed by thePostal Service and a second firm that we assume to be equallyefficient. We calculate the cost for each of the two firms in ourhypothetical duopoly by adjusting equation (2):SCfirmi = RCm + 0.5 * ECm + ffirmi * ACfirmi + vfirmi * ACfirmi(3)where, SCfirmi = street delivery cost for firm i ACfirmi =access cost for firm i = ACm * NCOV NCOV = new coverage a duopolyfirm i = 1 - (COVm - COVd)COVm = coverage for a monopoly = 1 - e -b*PPSCOVi = coverage for a duopoly firm i = 1 - e -b*PPS/2vfirmi = variable portion of access cost = ((e -b*PPS/2 * (b *PPS/2) / (1 - e -b*PPS/2))) ffirmi = fixed portion of access cost =(1 - vfirmi)The total delivery cost for the duopoly market is simplySCduopoly = 2 SCfirmi (4)For the year 1993, total street delivery costs for thehypothetical duopoly in the U.S. are as follows:SCfirmi = RCm + 0.5 * ECm + f * ACfirmi + v * ACfirmi (3) = 2.95+ 0.5 (1.91) + 0.52 (4.19) + 0.48 (4.19) = 8.098SCduopoly = 2 SCfirmi (4) = 2 * 8.098 = 16.2Value of Scale= SCduopoly - SCm = 16.2 - 10.1 = 6.1The value of scale in the U.S. is approximately $6.1 billion. In1993, the total cost for the Postal Service was about $48.2billion. If we assume that all cost segments other than streetdelivery (i.e., in-office delivery, mail processing,transportation, retail services, and other costs) vary with volume,the value of scale amounts to about 13 percent of the totalcost.2. Scale Economies for 21 Postal Systems1For each of the 20 countries (other than the U.S.) describedabove, we use a slightly different approach because detailed streetdelivery cost and point of delivery data are not available. We usevolume per capita as a proxy for pieces per possible stop andassume that the street delivery cost to total cost relationship ofthe U.S. is the same for the other 20 countries.First, we use volume per capita for each country to approximatepieces per possible stop. We assume a direct linear relationshipbetween volume per capita and pieces per possible stop:PPSi = (VCi / VCu.s.) * PPSu.s. (5)where, PPSi = Average pieces per possible stop for country iPPSu.s. = Average pieces per possible stop for the U.S. VCi =Volume per capita for country i VCu.s. = Volume per capita for theU.S.For the United Kingdom, for example, we estimate an average of1.8 pieces per possible stop (with a corresponding coverage ofabout 69 percent):PPSi = (VCi / VCu.s.) * PPSu.s. (5) = (264/536) * 3.66 = 0.49 *3.66 = 1.81In contrast to the previous section, all data in this sectionare from the year 1988.Using the estimates of pieces per possible stop for eachcountry, we calculate the monopoly cost and the duopoly cost usingequations (2), (3), and (4) based on the U.S. costs. For example,for the United Kingdom, equations (2), (3), and (4) would result inthe following results:SCm = RCm + ECm + fm * ACm + vm * ACm (2)= 2.95 + 0.94 + 0.48 (4.08) + 0.52 (4.08)= 7.98SCfirmi = RCm + 0.5 * ECm + f * ACfirmi + v * ACfirmi (3)= 2.95 + 0.5 (0.94) + 0.27 (2.78) + 0.73 (2.78)= 6.22SCduopoly = 2 SCfirmi (4)= 2 * 6.22= 12.44Value of Scale= SCduopoly - SCm= 12.44 - 7.98= 4.46The value of scale is about $4.46 billion using the U.S. model.In 1988, the total cost for the Postal Service was about $36.5billion. When we adjust the total cost for the United Kingdom'scoverage level, the total cost would be about $26.7 billion. If weassume that all cost segments other than street delivery vary withvolume, the value of scale is about 17 percent of the total cost atthe United Kingdom's volume and coverage levels. We then apply the17 percent estimate to the United Kingdom's actual total cost for1988 ($6.58 billion) to calculate the value of scale. The value ofscale for the United Kingdom is about $1.1 billion.