A Preliminary Version of this Paper was Presented atThe Evolving Structure of Postal and Delivery Industries June11-14, 1997, Helsingr, DenmarkSponsored by Center for Research in Regulated Industries atRutgers UniversityAN ANALYSIS OF THE POTENTIAL FOR CREAM SKIMMING IN THE U.S.RESIDENTIAL DELIVERY MARKETRobert H. Cohen William W. Ferguson John D. Waller Spyros S.XenakisOffice of Rates, Analysis and PlanningU.S. Postal Rate CommissionOctober 1998Published in Emerging Competition in Postal and DeliverySystems, edited by M.A. Crew andP.R. Kleindorfer. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1999.An Analysis of the Potential for Cream Skimming in the U.S.Residential Delivery MarketA. IntroductionPostal administrations often claim that without a legalmonopoly1 to protect them from cream skimming, they would not beable to continue providing universal service at uniform andaffordable prices. Because they serve delivery points with a rangeof profitability, postal administrations fear that without monopolyprotection cream skimmers would capture their high profit routes,leaving them with their less profitable routes. The question is,would cream skimming divert so much volume that universal serviceat affordable prices becomes infeasible?Sweden is the only industrial nation which actually has hadcompetition in its letter mail market after abolishing itsmonopoly.2 A competitor, City Mail, has served selected portions ofthe country but was twice forced into bankruptcy.3 City Mail hasagain emerged from bankruptcy and is competing with Sweden Post.Perhaps on City Mail's third attempt, we will finally have a validtest of whether Sweden Post actually needs monopoly protection inorder to provide universal service at reasonable prices. As far asthe authors know, the economics of the competition between SwedenPost and its competitor has not been studied. If City Mail finallysucceeds in avoiding bankruptcy, such a study might determine thereasons why Sweden Post was vulnerable to cream skimming. Inaddition, it might describe the impact that a viable competitor hashad on1In the U.S., as in most industrial nations, the postal monopolyextends only to letter mail (including addressed advertising).2Finland has abolished its monopoly and in so doing created alicensing system for competitors to Finland Post. No other operatorhas yet begun to offer service in competition with Finland Post.New Zealand has also just recently abolished its monopoly, but itis too early to know if competitors will emerge and besuccessful.3A recent study found that the Swedish Postal Service had engagedin a variety of anti-competitive practices with respect to itscompetitor. See "Deregulation of the Postal Service's Market;report on the abuse by the Postal Office of Its dominant marketposition and on the Competition Authority's handling of thequestion of competition in relation to the Post Office," ProfessorErik Nerep (Stockholm School of Economics), February 1995.the dominant provider. It should be noted that the presence ofCity Mail has already prompted Sweden Post to lower prices forlarge volume mailers in areas served by its competitor.4Cream skimmers take advantage of an incumbent's price when it isbased on an average of heterogeneous costs. They serve the low costportion of the market and price below the incumbent. Conceptuallycream skimming has two basic dimensions - product and geography.Product cream skimming is where a competitor tries to capture themost profitable portion of the market for a product withheterogeneous costs. Geographic cream skimming is where acompetitor tries to provide a service only to selected, low costareas.5 City Mail is an example of geographic cream skimming. Itscarriers provide twice weekly delivery to various areas in Swedenfor large volume customers.6 This paper addresses only geographiccream skimming. 7Postal monopolies, like most other legal monopolies, are thoughtby many observers (1) to be technically inefficient, and (2) tohave delivery functions which exhibit economies of scale.8 Thispaper addresses several questions which arise from these two pointsunder the assumption that the monopoly and any other barriers toentry were to be removed. It asks how much more efficient would apotential competitor have to be to overcome the scale economies ofthe U.S. Postal Service? Assuming potential competitors are able toachieve the necessary level of efficiency, it then asks how muchvolume might they be able to capture and in which markets? Finally,it asks what effect4It would be interesting to learn: How much it cost Sweden Postto serve the areas where it lowered prices relative to its averagecost, how important the abandonment of universal pricing is toSweden Post's competitive position, and are the circumstances inSweden applicable to the U.S.? Section J of this paper examinesthis issue further.5Cream skimming may have a third dimension having to do withtransactions costs. In practice cream skimmers may restrictthemselves to large volume customers since the transaction costs ofdealing with smaller volume customers and individuals may beprohibitive.6Sweden Post delivers five days per week.7A report by the General Accounting Office (GAO) at leastpartially analyzed the effect product cream skimming would have onthe U.S. Postal Service. Its assessment was as follows: PriorityMail (First Class over 11 ounces) - high risk of loss ofsignificant volumes, but a low financial impact, if it did occur;First Class - low risk of loss of significant volumes, but a highfinancial impact, if it did occur; Advertising Mail low risk ofloss and a medium financial impact, if it did occur. See "PostalService Reform; Issues Relevant to Changing Restrictions on PrivateLetter Delivery," General Accounting Office, September 1996.8In the U.S., legal monopolies include the local delivery ofelectricity, gas, water and until recently telephone.would the loss of volume to cream skimmers have on the resultingprices the Postal Service would have to charge in order to maintainuniversal service?Many observers believe that cream skimmers in the United Stateswould serve cities and leave rural areas to the universal serviceprovider because they assume that the cost of delivery to ruralareas is much higher than the cost of delivery to cities. Anearlier study9 challenged that assumption. It estimated that in1989 city delivery cost per piece was only 8 percent lower thanrural delivery, but that city delivery cost per delivery point wasactually 7 percent higher than rural delivery cost. It concludedthat there was no cross subsidy of rural delivery by city delivery.In theory, cream skimming of residential service could occur ineither city or rural areas. This paper focuses on city deliverybecause of the more detailed data available on this type ofdelivery.We first provide a brief description of the current competitionin delivery. We then describe the data used in our analysis and thecosts and profitability of the Postal Service's city residentialdelivery routes. We next examine the volume vulnerable to captureby potential cream skimmers. We describe characteristics of routesmost likely to be profitable to competitors and provide a range ofestimates for the cost of cream skimmers. After examining theconsequences of successful cream skimming on Postal Service rates,we explain why cream skimming is not likely to be successful onbusiness routes in the U.S. Finally, we provide some observationson the relevance this analysis may have for other countries.B. Current Competition In DeliveryCompetitors of the U.S. Postal Service may legally deliver onlyperiodicals, catalogues over 24 pages, parcels, and unaddressedletters.10 Alternative delivery is particularly difficult becauseof the so called mail box law which prohibits any one but the9 See Cohen, Ferguson & Xenakis, "Rural Delivery and theUniversal Service Obligation: A Quantitative Investigation."Regulation and the Nature of Postal Delivery Services, Ed. Crew& Kleindorfer, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1993.Technically, the U.S. monopoly is primarily a revenue monopoly.A third party may deliver a letter if proper postage is affixed andcanceled. The monopoly also has an urgent mail exception forletters which are charged twice normal First-Class postage with aminimum of $3.00. Unlike most industrial nations, there is noexemption from the monopoly based on weight or price.Postal Service from accessing a private mail box.11 The U.S.Postal Service broadly interprets "letter" to include any addressedinformation recorded on a physical object. Thus, for example, itconsiders an addressed grocery store advertisement to be aletter.In 1989, Publishers Express was founded by Time Inc., MeredithCorp., American Express Publishing, New York Times Co., TimesMirror Co., and R. R. Donnelley, among others, to providealternative delivery.12 In spite of its prestigious sponsorship,the company ceased operations in 1996. Many other smallentrepreneurs provide alternative delivery, but they have a verysmall share of the market. They are scattered around the countryand mostly deliver unaddressed "saturation" advertisements andsmall quantities of periodicals and small parcels.The real alternative delivery system in the United States is thenewspaper industry which delivers advertising preprints orinserts.13 The Postal Service has the advantage of being able todeliver these advertisements to all addresses, while newspapersusually (but not always) deliver inserts just to their subscribers.A typical newspaper in the U.S. has less than 50 percent coveragein its service area. This puts it at a disadvantage vis a vis thePostal Service, which delivers to all households. Newspapers, onthe other hand, have the advantage of charging lower prices.Because marginal costs are very low, a newspaper price forpreprints might be as low as 5 or 6 cents per piece. The lowestrate currently charged by the Postal Service is 11.0 to 11.4 centsfor saturation mail weighing up to 3.3 ounces and drop shipped atthe delivery office.14 Newspapers deliver about 86 billion insertsannually,15 while the U.S. Postal Service delivers at least 11billion competing items.1611As far as we know, the U.S. is the only country that has a mailbox rule.12For a more comprehensive discussion of alternative delivery inthe United States, see the General Accounting Office Study, n. 7,supra.13Newspapers also deliver product samples.14The Postal Service has an additional disadvantage because citycarriers deliver only addressed advertising mail. This requires themailer to have an address list kept in delivery sequence and tohave address labels for each piece.15Newspaper Association of America's WEB Site;www.naa.org/marketscope/databank/preppriyr.htm.16This was the saturation and 125-piece walk sequence EnhancedCarrier Route mail volume in 1996. Many of these items are socalled "marriage mail" pieces which contain several individualadvertisements combined into a single piece. These individualadvertisements could each be a stand-alone insert. Thus, 11 billionpieces is an extreme lower bound on the number of preprints carriedby the Postal Service.C. City Carrier DataEach year the Postal Service conducts a City Carrier Survey(CCS) of delivered mail volume by route. Between 1993 and 1996, thePostal Service conducted the survey using a relatively small panelof about 400 routes.17 Prior to that, the Postal Service randomlysampled a much larger cross section of its routes over the courseof a year. The last set of cross sectional data filed with thePostal Rate Commission in 1989 consisted of a sample of 16,092different routes.18 Because of the large sample size, these dataare far more useful for our analysis than the subsequent paneldata.19Each record in the 1989 CCS contains the date of theobservation, the 5-Digit ZIP Code in which the route is located,the route type,20 the number of pieces (by subclass and by shape)per stop, the number of possible deliveries and actual deliveriesper stop, and the stop type ("single delivery residential,""multi-delivery residential," and "business-and-mixed"). Generally,data are recorded for every tenth stop on a route. The authors wereable to make use of the records for 14,884 routes.21 This analysisis based on the data set of 13,212 usable residential routes22 and476,953 stops. 23 About 89 percent of all city routes areresidential routes. The rest are business or mixed (residential andbusiness).D. Postal Service Delivery Cost And ProfitabilityThis analysis uses delivery data from 1989, but uses 1996 costlevels for wages, fringe benefits, and other associated deliverycosts. Total volume grew 13.5 percent17A panel survey collects data repeatedly from the samesample.18There were 157 thousand city delivery routes in FY 1989. Therewere also 46 thousand rural routes, most of which had costscomparable to city delivery routes. See Cohen, Ferguson &Xenakis, n. 9, supra.19The 1997 CCS data were not available when the analysis for thispaper was conducted.20Business foot, business motorized, residential foot, residentialpark and loop, residential curb, mixed foot, mixed park and loop,and mixed curb.21The data are organized by the 26 pay periods in a year. Portionsof the data from a few pay periods were not usable. Comparisonswith previously published summaries indicate that the missing datadid not bias our results.22To a much lesser extent this analysis makes use of data from 717business routes.23Ninety-four percent (94%) of these stops are residential, whilesix percent (6%) are either business, or mixedbusiness-and-residential stops. Not all stops on a residentialroute are residences. Some are business stops and some are mixed(business and residential).between 1989 and 1996, and the number of routes increased 7percent. We make no attempt to adjust for these increases.When calculating city delivery cost, we include the entire(fixed and volume variable) in-office and out-of-office cost24 forall city routes, plus the cost of overtime, supervision, space, andvehicles. Starting with a productive hourly rate of $25.25 for citycarriers, we calculate a cost per residential delivery route of$266 per delivery day.25 The cost we calculate can be considered tobe the avoided cost or the incremental cost of the city deliveryfunction. Alternatively, it can be considered a lower bound on thestand-alone cost of city delivery.26We calculate the daily profit of residential delivery routes forthe Postal Service by totaling the revenue minus collection,processing and transportation costs of the mail delivered on eachroute and subtracting the delivery cost of $266.Table 1 displays a variety of mean route statistics forresidential routes separated into quartiles based on their profit.less As can be seen, the mean daily profit of each quartile rangesfrom positive $248 to negative $110. The average profit for allresidential routes is $41 with 46.5 percent of the routes operatingat a loss. The route cost per piece ranges from 7.6 cents to 23.5cents, and averages 12.5 cents. Route volume ranges from 3,485pieces to 1,131 pieces, and averages 2,128 pieces. The number ofpossible deliveries (which ranges from 670 to 411) is dependent onroute terrain. 27 All the statistics presented are monotonicacross28 quartiles except for route type. This is because of theclose relationship between cost (per piece, delivery and stop),volume24"In-office" refers to the in the office activity of a lettercarrier (primarily sequencing mail to be delivered),"out-of-office" refers to the activity of the carrier while on thestreet.25This is based on the city delivery carrier total cost of $33.20per hour. This, in turn, is based on a productive hourly rate (pay,overtime pay, and benefits for hours worked) increased to accountfor other costs that can be associated with carriers. These othercosts include systemwide labor related costs (e.g., worker'scompensation, civil service retirement unfunded liability),indirect labor such as carrier supervision, vehicle costs, andspace related costs (rents, fuel, utilities, custodialmaintenance). The standard work day for a city carrier is eighthours.26It is a lower bound because the cost includes no marketing oradministrative costs which a stand-alone firm would normallyincur.27By "physical terrain" we mean the physical proximity of thedelivery points and whether they are most advantageously served bya curb, park & loop, or foot route.28A monotonic series is one whose every term is greater than (lessthan) or equal to the previous term. 6(per piece, delivery and stop), and the number of deliveries(stops) on a route. With respect to route type, we see that thepercentage of curb routes is greatest in the most profitablequartile.29 These routes are largely a suburban phenomenon, theyreach more stops in a day and hence, have more volume. The appendix(Table A1) presents demographic characteristics related to thequartiles in Table 1.Table 1SELECTED AVERAGES FOR RESIDENTIAL ROUTES WHEN ROUTES ARE SORTEDBY PROFIT PER ROUTEProfit Cost (cents) Per (possible) Volume Pieces Per (possible)Quartile (dollars) Piece Delivery Stop (pieces) Deliverya StopaIn the paper referenced in n. 9, supra, pieces per possibledelivery were weighed by stop and produced a slightly higher piecesper delivery. Here they are unweighted.The revenue for 46.5 percent of the routes (all of quartile 4and most of quartile 3) is not enough to cover the costs of themail delivered on those routes. Thus, it might be argued that amonopoly is necessary to ensure service to those households. Forseveral reasons, it would seem the burden of proof for thisposition should fall on its proponents. The routes which areunprofitable are dispersed across the country in a great number ofcities. A competitive postal service that refused to servehouseholds on unprofitableCurb routes deliver directly from the vehicle to a curbside mailreceptacle. Park and loop routes involve parking, covering an areaby foot, then parking the vehicle in a new area.routes would impose large transaction costs on its customers toseparate mail and to secure suppliers to deliver its remainingmail. Such firms would be at a considerable disadvantage to thoseproviding universal service. Larger transaction networks (be theymail, packages, overnight or telephone) are more valuable tocustomers and providers than smaller networks. It is for soundbusiness reasons that Federal Express and United Parcel Serviceprovide universal delivery service. A major business asset of theU.S. Postal Service and all other national posts is that theyprovide service to every address in the countries they serve. Thus,there is a business incentive for any postal provider (who is notsimply a cream skimmer) to offer universal service within theterritories it serves.Routes which are unprofitable when serviced six days per weekwould become profitable when serviced less frequently. In acompetitive environment, the Postal Service could easily retainuniversal service, but perhaps not a universal service standard.30Delivery less than six days per week would certainly be preferableto abandoning delivery altogether. Of course, if the Postal Servicewere to simply abandon delivery to unprofitable routes, it wouldnot have to refuse, return or destroy mail destined to theseroutes. Delivery firms with lower costs than the Postal Servicewould emerge to serve them and the Postal Service could hand offits unprofitable mail to them. 31 Under any foreseeablecircumstances, universal delivery would not cease.32E. Volume Available For Cream SkimmersIt is unlikely that cream skimmers would base their selection ofareas to serve on the Postal Service's delivery profits. PostalService delivery profitability depends on the revenue for all maildelivered, and it is not likely that cream skimmers could captureall categories of mail.30It is interesting to note that United Parcel Service recentlybegan delivery less frequently than daily to certain residentialareas.31Costs would be lower by dint of lower wages and/or less frequentdelivery.32The concept of a universal service obligation may really meanmore frequent delivery than economically warranted for householdsliving on unprofitable routes. This, of course, is in addition toproviding retail services to rural communities.Residential cream skimmers would serve bulk mailers withsufficient volumes of mail for the areas they serve. We assume thatonly mail that is presorted to the carrier route level would bevulnerable to cream skimming. If a bulk mailer did not havesufficient volume to sort to the carrier route level, thetransaction costs for both mailer and cream skimmer would beprohibitive. Of course, third parties might become intermediariesbetween these bulk mailers and cream skimmers. Such parties wouldhave to engage in processing and transportation. They would ineffect be a parallel postal system for bulk mailers. An analysis ofseparate postal systems for bulk mailers is beyond the scope ofthis paper.The U.S. Postal Service requires First-Class and advertisingmail to have at least ten pieces for a carrier to qualify for acarrier route discount. Publications may qualify with as few as sixpieces for a carrier route. The amounts being presorted to thecarrier route level in 1996 are shown in the right hand column:First-Class Mail is unzoned and receives no discount for beingdeposited near its destination. Most First-Class carrier routevolume is prepared by utilities and may be local depending on thebilling operations of the utility. For purposes of this analysis weassume that all First-Class carrier route mail is available tolocal cream skimmers.Publications Mail. While only 3.2 billion pieces of the carrierroute volume is entered locally or entered close enough to itsdestination to be available to cream skimmers, we assume that all4.5 billion pieces are available to cream skimmers.Advertising Mail. Eight-five (85) percent or 25.2 billion piecesof carrier route advertising mail are drop shipped or enteredlocally. Notwithstanding, we assume here that all carrier routeadvertising mail would be available to cream skimmers.To summarize, 37.7 billion pieces of carrier route volume arepotentially available to cream skimmers.33 This represents 20.6percent of the total volume of 182.7 billion pieces in 1996.Geographic cream skimmers would concentrate on areas with the mostcarrier route volume because their cost per piece would be lowestand their potential profit would be the greatest.Table 2 displays mean daily route statistics for routes whendivided into quartiles reflecting their volumes of carrier routemail. We see a wide divergence in carrier route volume among thequartiles. The range is from 1,263 pieces to 87 pieces with anaverage of 551. The first quartile routes have more than twice thevolume of carrier route mail as the second quartile. In fact, thefirst quartile has more than half of all carrier route volumedelivered on residential routes. Thus, the first quartile of routesare much more attractive targets for cream skimmers than the otherroutes. We again see a monotonic behavior of the other variablesacross quartiles.34 Route profitability by quartile in Table 2changes by a sizable amount as compared to route profitability inTable 1. Less than half the routes in quartile 1, Table 1, are alsoin quartile 1, Table 2. The appendix (Table A2) presentsdemographic characteristics related to the quartiles in Table2.33Some of this mail is delivered by rural carriers. For purpose ofthis analysis, we assume that rural delivery is subject to the samedegree of cream skimming as city delivery. However, some carrierroute mail is delivered on business routes and some is deliveredvia post office boxes and, thus, would not be available to creamskimmers. Consequently, 37.7 billion represents an upper bound ofthe volume available to cream skimmers.34The only deviation from the monotonic behavior in Table 2 occursfor deliveries per route between quartiles 2 and 3.Table 2SELECTED AVERAGES FOR RESIDENTIAL ROUTES WHEN ROUTES ARE SORTEDBY VOLUME OF CARRIER ROUTE MAIL PER ROUTEProfit Cost (cents) Per (possible) Quartile (dollars) PieceDelivery StopVolume (pieces) All Carrier Pieces Per (possible) Mail RouteDelivery StopF. Estimating The Delivery Cost For Cream SkimmersCream skimmers undercut prices charged by an incumbent that hasheterogeneous costs but averaged prices. Cream skimmers profit byselling low cost items at below the incumbents average price.Delivery cream skimmers would attempt to serve those areas wherethe cost to deliver carrier route pieces is the lowest (i.e., wherethe volume of carrier route pieces is the highest). The firstquartile of routes in Table 2 would make the best targets. It isthis case we examine.In an important sense, this is an unrealistic case sincequartile 1 represents 40,000 routes which are scattered over morethan half the 30,000 5-Digit ZIP Code areas in the U.S. It isextremely unlikely that they constitute all the residential routesin any 5-Digit ZIP Code nor is it likely that they make up theentire suburban ring around cities. It is unrealistic for creamskimmers to serve such a fragmented market. From both anoperational and marketing standpoint, cream skimmers would have toserve markets with at best a large proportion of routes in quartile1. Their markets would undoubtedly contain a large number of routesin the other quartiles. Notwithstanding, for analytical purposes,we assume the best possible case for cream skimmers; that theywould be able to serve only routes that fall within quartile 1.A potential competitor must decide the level of service toprovide and this decision would affect the amount of volume that itcould actually capture. Many magazines, newspapers, andadvertisements must be delivered within a one, two or three daywindow. A competitor delivering only one day a week would have toforego much potential volume. On the other hand, delivery six daysa week would certainly raise the cost per delivered piece and makeit less likely that a cream skimmer would be viable.35 City Mail inSweden chose to deliver two days per week (Monday/Thursday in someareas and Tuesday/Friday in other areas).In all probability, a cream skimmer could not prosper unless itcould deliver mail at a price less than the incumbent postaladministration. Its cost per delivered piece would be a function ofits cost of labor and productivity. It would be expected that acream skimmer would have a significant labor cost advantage. Itsproductivity would be influenced by the in-office and out-of-officetechnology it employed. In 1989, Postal Service carriers spent morethan 40 percent of their time in-office preparing for delivery onthe street. Many mailstreams must be merged and sorted intodelivery sequence.36 It is not clear what technology cream skimmerswould use. Moreover, we do not know whether the personnel of acream skimmer would be more productive on the street thanU.S. Postal Service carriers. This analysis will combine thesevariables (labor cost, technology, in-office and out-of-officeproductivity) into a single efficiency parameter.35In a sense, each piece of advertising mail competes with otheradvertising mail for the recipient's attention. If a cream skimmercould capture a large portion of the available carrier routevolume, its customers might prefer more frequent delivery tominimize this type of competition.36This function is rapidly being automated for letter size mail inthe U.S. Delivery point barcoded mail is increasingly beingsequenced on sorting machines, saving significant in-officedelivery time. From 1989 to 1996, the percentage of in-office timefor city carriers has declined from 41 percent to 34 percent. It isexpected that this trend will continue. Unless a potential creamskimmer had enough capital to employ sequencing automation, thePostal Service might have a significant advantage in sequencing andmerging letter-shaped mail. First Class is almost all lettershaped, publications are almost all flat shaped, and carrier routeadvertising is 43 percent letter shaped.G. Cream Skimmers Cost Per PieceTable 3 has four matrices, each reflecting a differentpercentage of available volume assumed to be captured by creamskimmers. Each matrix presents cream skimmer unit or per piececosts based on frequency of delivery and relative efficiency of thecream skimmer. We measure relative efficiency in terms of creamskimmers cost relative to the Postal Service's cost.The shaded cell in the top matrix, 13.1 cents, is the PostalService cost per piece for delivering only carrier route presortedmail in the least expensive quartile. This number is derived fromthe 8.7 cent cost of the Postal Service delivering all mail in theleast expensive quartile shown in Table 2. If only the carrierroute mail is delivered, the average delivered volume decreasesfrom 3,051 to 1,263 in this quartile. The variable costs drop asthe volume drops, but the fixed costs are spread over less volumewhich increases the fixed costs proportionately. The result is anincrease in the unit costs to13.1 cents shown in Table 3. Going down that column, the costsper piece are displayed assuming a cream skimmer had the same costas the U.S. Postal Service, but delivers fewer days per week. Thecosts decrease by the amount of fixed costs in delivery. Thevariable cost remains the same because the volume does not change.Most other national postal administrations would have a greaterpercentage of fixed costs because they have fewer pieces perpossible delivery.37The columns display cream skimmers' costs as a function of U.S.Postal Service efficiency, expressed as a percentage of the PostalService's delivery cost per piece. The 120 percent column displaysthe cream skimmer's per piece cost if its cost were 120 percent ofthe U.S. Postal Service.38 The 60 percent column displays the creamskimmer's per piece cost if its cost were 60 percent of the U.S.Postal Service.Table 3CREAM SKIMMER'S COST PER PIECE IN CENTS AS A FUNCTION OFEFFICIENCY RELATIVE TO POSTAL SERVICE, DAYS OF DELIVERY AND PERCENTOF CARRIER ROUTE MAIL100% OF CARRIER ROUTE VOLUME CAPTURED75% OF CARRIER ROUTE VOLUME CAPTURED50% OF CARRIER ROUTE VOLUME CAPTURED25% OF CARRIER ROUTE VOLUME CAPTUREDFor all mail the Postal Service city carrier cost (fixed andvariable) is 12.5 cents per piece. (See Tables 1 and 2, cost perpiece all routes.) This is the cost for the delivery function. Eachpostal product has a variable cost for mail processing,transportation and delivery. Each product also has an averageincremental (avoidable) cost. In the case of advertising carrierroute mail, the average incremental cost is about 7 cents.39 Ifthreatened by cream skimmers, the Postal Service could respond bylowering its price towards average incremental costs. If the PostalService maintained uniform prices but had competition only inselected areas, it would sacrifice revenue in those areas withoutcompetition. These circumstances would probably call for selectivediscounts (with average incremental costs as a floor) to largevolume mailers40 who would otherwise become customers of creamskimmers. Thus, cream skimmers would most likely have to have costsno higher than approximately 7 cents per piece in order to competeon a cost basis alone.41The Postal Service's productive hourly wage of more than $25 maymake it likely that cream skimmers could obtain some cost advantageon that basis alone. We do not know how reducing the frequency ofdelivery would affect demand for alternative delivery. A two-dayfrequency could satisfy a three-day window, but would miss manydelivery dates for time value publications. It should also be notedthat some customers may not be willing to leave the Postal Servicefor a variety of reasons including the sense of security of dealingwith a government agency.If a cream skimmer were to capture only 25 percent of theavailable market, it would have difficulty succeeding. At thatlevel of market penetration, its costs would have to be 40 percentof the Postal Service's at a two-day frequency in order to be belowPostal Service incremental costs. With 50 percent of the averagevolume at a two-day frequency, a cream skimmer's costs would haveto be 60 percent or less of the Postal Service's in order to remainbelow the Service's average incremental costs.39The variable cost of carrier route advertising mail comespredominantly from the delivery function (in-office andout-of-office). The delivery function is about 50 percent variable.Thus, the variable cost of the advertising carrier route mailproduct can be much lower than the average (fixed and variable)cost of delivery. The average incremental cost of advertisingcarrier route mail is only slightly higher than the variable costsince we estimate it here to consist of variable costs plus singlesubclass stop costs for 1996.40Except for a customer with a very high elasticity of demand,there is no reason for a monopoly to grant volume based discountssince customers have no alternative supplier. We understand thiswas the case with UPS, which had a virtual monopoly in surfaceparcel delivery in the U.S., and did not give discounts to surfaceparcel customers until Roadway Package Service began to target itsmost lucrative customers in the 1980s. UPS then began offeringdiscounts to certain large volume customers.41Some mailers currently use cream skimmers because of serviceconsiderations.H. Consequences Of Successful Cream SkimmingTable 4 shows the required increase in the U.S. Postal Servicerates based on the percentage of carrier route volume that would becaptured by cream skimmers targeting mail in quartile 1, Table 2.42The maximum effect is an increase of about 1.2 cents in theFirst-Class rate (with corresponding increases in the otherclasses). This would be an increase of nearly 4 percent; asignificant but limited effect.Lifting the letter mail monopoly and allowing cream skimmingwould likely have an important impact on rate setting for thePostal Service's large volume carrier route customers, if ourassumptions are correct concerning the amount of volume availablefor capture by cream skimmers. The maximum impact on overall postalrates is, however, likely to be limited. The negative impact onPostal Service's finances would likely be offset to a great extentby the effect of limited competition on the Postal Service'sefficiency, service performance and product innovation.Table 4 IMPACT OF CREAM SKIMMING ONI. Comparison Of Business And Residential RoutesWe do not analyze cream skimming on business routes because only7 percent of mail volume delivered on them is carrier route ascompared to 26 percent on residential routes. This makes themunlikely candidates for cream skimming based on our analysis. Wecompare several statistics for city residential and business routesin Table 5.Table 5 COSTS BY TYPE OF CITY DELIVERY ROUTEIt can be seen that business routes have slightly more piecesper route with slightly higher cost per piece.43 The cost perdelivery point and stop on business routes is much higher, but theprofit per piece remains higher.44We are not aware of any study that has identified the reasonswhy business routes have a higher cost per piece and much highercost per stop than residential routes. Several factors maycontribute, including the high cost of serving each individualbusiness in office buildings. In contrast, residential apartmenthouses generally have mail boxes in one central and convenientlocation for carriers. Other factors include the larger proportionof business mail requiring signatures and the greater difficulty ofgetting around in congested business areas as opposed toresidential and suburban neighborhoods. Because business routeshave much higher cost per delivery point, they43Business routes get much more assistance from routers whosequence the mail in the office, thus saving in-office time for thecarrier. The cost per piece and per delivery point reflects theseextra costs.44Profit is higher on business routes than on residential routesbecause of greater volumes of high profit mail, such as on Priorityand Express. Cream skimming delivery networks might be developedfor such mail in business areas, but are beyond the scope of thispaper.are unlikely candidates for geographic cream skimmers who couldbe expected to have far fewer pieces over which to spread the costper delivery point.45J. Some Differences Between the U.S. and Other CountriesThe classification structures in industrial countries havevarying degrees of efficiency (defined as adherence to cost).46Efficient classification discourages cream skimmers because itleaves less cream to skim. The less efficient the classificationstructure, the more the administration needs monopoly protection.The U.S. Postal Service's classification structure contains severalscore of cost based discounts and rate differentials, probably morethan any other administration.47 This should tend to make the U.S.less vulnerable to cream skimming. Moreover, the U.S. has morepieces per capita than virtually any other country. Because thedelivery function has important economies of scale, ceterisparibus, the U.S. should have lower per piece costs than virtuallyevery other country. This factor also makes the U.S. lessvulnerable to cream skimming. In addition, the proportion of fixedcost in the delivery network is largely a function of volume percapita (per delivery). The larger the volume per capita, the largerthe proportion of variable costs and the smaller the proportion offixed costs. Since virtually every other postal administration hasless volume per capita than the U.S., a larger proportion of theirdelivery costs are fixed relative to the U.S. A cream skimmer canreduce its fixed cost relative to an incumbent simply by reducingthe number of days of delivery. Thus, a cream skimmer would obtainless cost advantage by cutting delivery frequency in the U.S. thanin countries with less per capita volume. This also tends to makethe U.S. less vulnerable to cream skimming than othercountries.4845Of course, messenger services are common in central businessdistricts, but this is for reasons of service and not cost.46The most efficient classification structure would be based oncosts alone and would offer worksharing discounts whereverpractical. These discounts would equal the cost savings. No postaladministration meets this standard nor do the authors recommendthat they do.47Advertising mail alone has over 60 different rate categorieswith rate differentials based on shape and discounts forpresorting, barcoding and drop shipping.48A consequence of this is that an administration which deliversfive days per week, ceteris paribus, is a more difficult target forcream skimmers than one which delivers six days per week.On the other hand, some factors appear to make the U.S. PostalService more vulnerable than other postal administrations to creamskimming. Few, if any, countries have as large a proportion ofcarrier route volume as does the U.S. This is the mail mostsusceptible to diversion. In addition, few postal administrationspay their employees as large a wage premium as does the U.S. PostalService.49 A wage premium allows cream skimmers to obtain anefficiency/cost advantage simply by paying the prevailing wage.49 See Cohen, Chu, Ferguson & Xenakis, "A Cross SectionalComparison and Analysis of Productivity for 21 National PostalAdministrations." Managing Change in the Postal and DeliveryIndustries, Ed. Crew & Kleindorfer, Kluwer Academic Publishers,1997.APPENDIXThis paper's analysis is based on volume and delivery statisticsfrom 13,212 residential carrier routes. These routes were extractedfrom the Carrier Cost Survey (CCS), conducted by the U.S. PostalService in 1989. In addition to the volume and delivery statisticsfor each of the 13,212 residential routes, CCS provides theassociated 5-Digit ZIP Code served by each route. A ZIP Code may beserved by many routes. The data presented in this appendix arebased on the demographic data for the 5-Digit ZIP Code for eachroute in a quartile. Thus, the demographic data for the same5-Digit ZIP Code could be averaged into the totals for twodifferent quartiles. This would happen if two routes from the same5-Digit ZIP Code were in separate quartiles.The United States Bureau of the Census has grouped the 1990Census of Population and Housing data using 5-Digit ZIP Codes. Thefile (STF 3B) is available in three CDs of about 1.4 gigabytes(GBs) and contains socio-economic data for 29,467 5-Digit ZIP Codesserved by the U.S. Postal Service. The Puerto Rico ZIP Codes arenot included in STF 3B file.By merging the STF 3B file with CCS data, we have obtainedeconomic and demographic data for the ZIP Codes in which 12,876residential routes reside. We could not obtain any socio-economicinformation for the ZIP Codes of 336 residential routes (most ofthem in Puerto Rico) because their ZIP Codes were not included inthe STF 3B file.Tables A1 through A3 provide statistics for age, householdincome, and education attainment for the 5-Digit ZIP Code for the12,876 residential routes in CCS. Table A1 presents the statisticsby quartile when routes are sorted by profitability. Tables A2 andA3 present the statistics by quartile and decile respectively whenroutes are sorted by carrier route volume. The statistics in TableA1 show that, on average, routes in the more profitable quartilesreside in ZIP Codes with higher income households and more educatedadults. Likewise, the statistics in Tables A2 and A3 show thatroutes with high carrier route volume reside in ZIP Codes withhigher levels of household income and education attainment.