Delivery Cost Heterogeneity and Vulnerability to Entry*Stephane BernardLa PosteRobert CohenPostal Rate CommissionMatthew RobinsonPostal Rate CommissionBernard RoyLa PosteJolle ToledanoLa PosteJohn WallerPostal Rate CommissionSpyros XenakisPostal Rate Commission1. INTRODUCTIONVirtually every post in an industrialized country deliversmonopoly products everywhere at a uniform price in spite of largedifferences in the cost of serving different geographic areas. Thisraises the possibility of an entrant competing successfully eventhough it has higher costs than the incumbent. A simple exampleillustrates this. Suppose a post serves a country composed of twoareas and its cost to deliver a piece of mail in one area is fivecents and is 15 cents in the other. A breakeven post with a uniformtariff would charge its average cost of 10 cents a piece fordelivery throughout the country. If a less efficient entrant's costfor serving the low cost area were six cents a piece, it couldcharge less than 10 cents in that area and be profitable. Eachpiece of mail that the entrant delivered would raise the averagecost of delivery in the country. Ceteris paribus, inefficient entrymeans that the total resources required to deliver mailincreases.*The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors anddo not necessarily represent the opinions of La Poste or the PostalRate CommissionIf in the above example the cost had been nine cents in the lowcost area and 11 cents in the high cost area, it would be much moredifficult for inefficient entry to occur. Delivery costheterogeneity is an essential condition for inefficient entry andthe degree of the heterogeneity would play an important role indetermining the vulnerability to inefficient entry.1The delivery function is the most important source of inherentcost differences between the geographic areas served by a post and,indeed between posts themselves. This paper explores the reasonsthat underlie differences in delivery costs among geographic areas.We do this by comparing delivery costs in two diverse countries:France and the U.S. We think that international comparisons canlead to important insights.We first present demographic and postal delivery characteristicsfor the two countries. This leads us to develop the concept ofpostal density as a measure that reflects the impact of thesecharacteristics on delivery costs. We examine differences in postaldensity for rural areas and for densely populated areas to identifythe effect of different delivery practices in each country. Acomparison is then made of the heterogeneity in delivery costs forFrance and the U.S. We proceed to explore the relative roles ofpostal density and volume as delivery cost drivers. Finally, wecompare the engineering and econometric approaches used to estimateunit delivery costs for France and the U.S., respectively, overreasonable ranges of the delivery cost drivers. The data used forthe analysis are described in the Appendix.2. SOME BASIC COMPARISONSIt would seem that the variation of delivery costs within theU.S. would be greater than in France. Population density in theformer ranges from very high (New York City) to very low (Wyomingand Montana). France, on the other hand, has densely populatedcities but no areas as sparsely settled as in the United States.2Surprisingly, however, we will find that France has a greatervariation in delivery costs.France has 109 persons per square kilometer and the U.S. has 30.A greater percentage of the French population lives in cities,while a larger percentage of the U.S. population lives in suburbs.The distance between delivery points in France is much smaller thanin the U.S. and, consequently, the modes of delivery are verydifferent, as can be seen in Table 1.1The conditions for competitive entry depend on several otherfactors as well [Cohen et al. (2000), Cremer et al., (2000)].2The population density (people per square kilometer) of the fiveleast densely populated states in the continentalU.S. are Wyoming 1.8, Montana 2.1, South Dakota 3.5, NorthDakota 3.6 and Nevada 4.2. The population density of the two leastpopulated departments of France, Creuse and Lozre, is 14 personsper square kilometer.Table 1: Comparison of Mode of Delivery by Route in France andthe U.S.aRounds to less than one percentbPark and loop refers to a route where the carrier parks his orher vehicle and serves a group ofhouses on foot, returns to the vehicle and drives to anotherlocation where the process isrepeated. cAutomobile includes small trucks.The geographic concentration of the French population permitsmuch more efficient delivery by foot or bicycle than in the U.S.3In France only carriers serving rural areas use automobiles but inthe U.S. it is the primary means of delivery. The quality ofdelivery service is also higher in France where all delivery is toa building. In the U.S. delivery is made to buildings and also tocurbside mailboxes (in cities and suburbs) and to rural roadsidemailboxes. This allows the carrier to place mail in the mailboxdirectly from the vehicle. In addition, in U.S. rural areascarriers serve principal roads only and residents who do not liveon the carrier's line of travel must place their mailboxes on thatroad. This frequently results in roadside boxes being clusteredwhere the carrier's line of travel intersects with roads not on theline of travel. These boxes are less expensive to serve than ifthey were spread out along the intersecting road.Unlike France the U.S. also makes extensive use of kiosks fordelivery.4 They allow more efficient delivery because the carriermakes only one stop to deliver to several addresses (commercial orresidential). This requires recipients to walk some distance fromtheir homes or offices to the kiosk to collect their mail. Eightand a half million addresses or seven percent of the totaladdresses served have mail delivered to kiosks.3. POSTAL DENSITYThe variable cost of delivery depends on volume delivered, thusthe comparison of variable costs between France and the U.S. isstraightforward. It might seem that population density could beused to compare differences in the fixed cost of delivery. We haveseen, however, that population density is not the only explanationfor fixed cost differences. The fixed cost of3The smaller volume per capita for France (320 in 1999) incomparison to the U.S. (739) also contributes to efficient deliveryby foot or bicycle.4Kiosks are free standing structures containing locked mailboxes(as few as three or four and as many as sixty or so). They arecalled "neighborhood delivery centralized box units."delivery (called route time in U.S. delivery cost analyses),5 isaccounted for by the need for the carrier to move from one stop6 toanother whatever the mode of delivery. Therefore we use "postaldensity" as the driver of fixed costs.Postal density is the number of delivery points that can bevisited by the carrier in one hour of time, excluding loading timeand the variable portion of access time and the variable portion oftravel time to and from the route. It renders endogenous all of thephysical characteristics of the route including the mode ofdelivery, the "grouping-ratio" (addresses per stop), and thedifficulty of accessing the buildings.7 This measure also makescomparison possible in spite of the differences in quality ofdelivery service.8Delivery to a multiple address building or to a multiple addresskiosk means that the fixed cost of traveling to that stop is spreadamong the several addresses which receive mail there. The conceptof postal density conveniently expresses the cost consequences ofboth multi-address buildings and multi-address kiosks. We will seebelow that the variations in postal density are different fromvariations in population density. Postal density is a measure thatcontains two dimensions: exogenous cost drivers such as geographicand demographic characteristics of the areas served, and endogenousdrivers reflecting the quality of delivery service. On theendogenous dimension, postal density could in principle be "tuned"by the postal operator by adjusting quality of service. Of course,an increase in postal density would require a reduction in thequality of service that may not be compatible with the wayuniversal service obligations are defined in a country.93.1 Comparison of French and U.S. Postal DensitiesTable 2 compares French and U.S. postal densities at variousquantiles. The French postal density is higher at every quantile,but the ratio is strikingly high at the 95th and 90th quantileswhere it exceeds 3 to 1. On average the French postal densityexceeds the U.S. by a ratio of 2.5 to 1. This is somewhat less thanthe ratio of population density between France and the U.S. whichis 3.6 to 1.105See PRC Docket No. R2000-1.6A stop can serve one or more addresses.7It also gives a better view of the parts of the country that areactually populated. Totally deserted areas are notreflected in this driver.8We mean by "quality of delivery service" such things as door,curbside or roadside line of travel delivery. Theterm as used here is not meant to include frequency ofdelivery.9The ability of an operator to adjust quality of delivery servicecan be affected by the applicable postal law in eachcountry. For example, French law requires delivery to the door.This level of delivery service, treated as auniversal service obligation in France, is primarily defined byhistory and tradition. Thus, delivery quality (andtherefore postal density) can in theory be tuned by the operatorbut in practice may be constrained by law.10 Part of the reason that the U.S. postal densities have suchlow values with a narrow range may be due to stale data.The USPS determines the amount of current carrier time based onthe percentages of time spent in route and loadactivities calculated with data collected in 1985. New data mayshow an increase in variable load time to reflectthe increased use of kiosks and a decrease in route time. Thiswould produce higher postal densities.Table 2: Postal Density Comparison with Routes Ranked by PostalDensity3.2 Rural AreasPostal densities in rural areas of France and the U.S. are verydifferent owing to the quality of service. We have found that thepostal density in France of the 10 percent of addressees with thelowest population density is 46 while it is 89 in the equivalentareas of the U.S. This is remarkable in light of the much lowerpopulation densities in the U.S. Addresses in the most rural areasof France are much closer together than in the equivalent areas ofthe U.S. A French carrier must, however, turn into the farmer'sdriveway and proceed to the dwelling. Once there, he or she mustalight from the vehicle and proceed to the mailbox, then return tothe vehicle, turn it around and proceed to the road. In the U.S.the carrier remains on the road, stops at a roadside mailbox andplaces mail in it without leaving the vehicle.11 This contributesto the affordability of postage in the U.S. Each country has made adifferent cost/service tradeoff, which is reflected in eachcountry's concept of universal service.Within the U.S. it is surprising that the average postal densityof the bottom quartile of routes (ranked by cost) is lower than thepostal density for the rural routes serving the least denselysettled 10 percent of the population (50 versus 89). This isbecause rural routes in the U.S. have a higher postal density thanmost park and loop city routes and business routes. This in turnindicates the greater efficiency of delivering mail to roadsidemailboxes compared to walking to the front door of a detacheddwelling or business. Park and loop routes serve cities and theirinner suburbs while curbline routes serve the outer suburbs. Thus,the postal density of carriers' walking between nearby stops islower than that of carriers' driving between greatly separatedstops. The postal density of 89 addresses per hour for the mostrural population corresponds to roadside mailboxes that are 280meters apart (on average). Many detached houses in cities are asclose as 20 meters apart. In France, the bottom decile of routesranked by population density averages 46. The average distancebetween two stops is around 400 meters, and the delivery to thedoor increases time between two stops.11 Moreover, on many roads served by rural carriers, mailboxesmust be placed on only one designated side of theroad. This relieves the carrier from the need to travel backdown a road to serve curbside boxes on the other sideof the road.3.3 Densely Populated AreasAt the extreme, U.S. population densities are as high as Frenchpopulation densities. For example, Table 3 shows that the innerarea of New York has a higher population density than that ofParis. But on average U.S. population densities are much lower asindicated in Table 3 which shows that the urbanized area of Parisis much more densely populated than that of New York.Table 3: Population and Population Density in New York andParisaaData Source: Demographia 2001 bVille de Paris for Paris and theborough of Manhattan for New YorkThis is reflected in the ratio of multi-address stops to singleaddress stops in the two countries. Figure 1 displays thisrelationship.12 It shows the ratio of delivery points to stopsranked by cost. At the left side of the graph where volume is leastcostly to deliver we find the most multiple address stops. As theratio of points to stops decreases, mail gets more expensive todeliver. La Poste has a much higher ratio of multiple address stopsthan the USPS.Figure 1: Ratio: Delivery Points to Stops5%10%15%20%25%30%35%40%45%50%55%60%65%70%75%80%85%90%95%100%Semi-decile of Volume (Routes Ranked by Increasing DeliveryCosts)12 Figure 1 contains data for USPS city carriers only.3.4 Comparison of Variation in Postal Density and VolumeFigure 2 displays the range of postal density and annual volumeper address that encompass approximately 90 percent of the routesin France and the United States. It shows much greater variation inFrench postal densities than for the U.S. and much smallervariation in volume per address in France than in the U.S. The areaof overlap is quite small relative to the ranges for each country.The greater variation in volume per address in the U.S. is probablydue to the fact that mail volume and income are highly correlatedand the fact that the U.S. has a much larger variation in incomeper household than France.13 The smaller variation in U.S. postaldensities is due to differences in the quality of delivery servicewhich dampen the impact of low population density on many routes.Because France has a uniform quality of delivery, its postaldensity differences are much greater.Figure 2: Range of Postal Densities and Volumes for France andUSA35003000USA 250020001500France 100050000 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900Postal Density (Possible Deliveries Per Hour)4. HETEROGENEITY AND RELATIVE VULNERABILITY TO INEFFICIENTENTRYFigure 3 displays the distribution of normalized French and U.S.delivery costs for each semi-decile of volume (or traffic) whenroutes are ranked from least to most costly. To protectcommercially sensitive data and to facilitate comparison we displaynormalized costs and not actual unit costs.14 All unit costs aredisplayed relative to the mean of the distribution of unit costs.For purposes of this analysis we discard the first and lastsemi-deciles for each country because the observations upon whichthey are based contain data of questionable accuracy.13 See Cohen, et al., (2002).14 Unit costs refer to carrier street time measured in secondsper delivered piece. Time is an international currency andfacilitates cost comparisons.Volume (Annual Pieces per Address)Figure 3: Comparison of Unit Delivery Costs of La Poste andUSPS3.00Indexed Unit Delivery Costs (Mean = 1.00)2.502.001.501.000.500.00 5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40% 45% 50% 55% 60% 65% 70% 75%80% 85% 90% 95% 100%Semi-decile of Volume (Routes Ranked by Increasing DeliveryCosts)We see that the range of the French distribution is greater thanthe U.S. distribution. The former begins with a cost of 0.24(relative to the mean) and ends with a cost of 2.57 (relative tothe mean). The U.S., on the other hand, begins with a cost of 0.33and ends with a cost of 1.93. The standard deviation of thenormalized French distribution is half again as large as thenormalized U.S. distribution (0.67 vs. 0.44). Thus, the Frenchdistribution is more heterogeneous than the U.S. distribution.Vulnerability to inefficient entry can be addressed usingdelivery cost heterogeneity. Some indicators of vulnerability are:the percentage of the volume that has a unit cost less than halfthe mean, the size of the area between actual costs and the averagecost, and the average slope of the cost curve. These are based onthe conjecture that an entrant would seek to compete where the unitdelivery cost was very low while using the uniform tariff as anumbrella price. These measures of vulnerability make sense, ofcourse, only with a uniform tariff constraint, and more generallywhen geographical cost oriented tariffs are not applied.Figure 3 reveals that in France 33 percent of the volume has acost less than half the mean while in the U.S. only 20 percent ofthe volume is below this threshold. Ceteris paribus, France is morevulnerable to inefficient entry. Another relevant factor would bethe geographical concentration of the low cost volume. We believethat the low cost volume is scattered over perhaps a hundred ormore U.S. metropolitan areas while in France the volume isconcentrated in relatively few cities. Thus, it would be far easierfor an entrant to market its alternative service in France than inthe U.S. In addition, France has about half the per capita volumeof the U.S. giving it less economies of scale. This means that theconsequence of volume erosion would be greater in France than inthe U.S. There are, of course, other relevant factors affectingentry such as wage premium, efficiency of operation andclassification efficiency.1515 See Cohen, et al., (2002).Figure 4 compares French and U.S. traffic and French and U.S.postal densities when routes are ranked by cost. We see that inboth countries the volume for the least costly areas isapproximately twice that of the most costly areas. Thus, the volumerange for both is about two to one. The range of postal density ismuch greater for both countries. The maximum is eleven times theminimum for France and 4.5 times the minimum for the U.S. Thegreater variation in French postal density leads to a greatervariation in French unit costs relative to the U.S. As discussedbelow, the lower French volume magnifies the impact on unit costfrom the variations in postal density.Figure 4: Volume Per Delivery Point and Postal Density10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40% 45% 50% 55% 60% 65% 70% 75% 80% 85%90% 95%Semi-decile of Volume (Routes Ranked by Increasing DeliveryCosts)The different ranges in postal density and volume when routesare organized by cost rather than organized by postal density orvolume (as displayed earlier in Figure 2) demonstrate theinteraction of postal density, volume, and delivery costs. Inparticular the actual volume ranges shown in Figure 2 are muchgreater than the two to one ratios observed in Figure 4.Figure 4 displays an interesting phenomena in that for the mostcostly 35 percent of the routes the postal density in France islower than in the U.S. This is due to the fact that in theU.S. the most sparsely populated areas do not correspond to thehighest cost routes. This is partly explained by the line-of-travelrequirement, which greatly reduces the cost of delivery in areaswith low population density. Moreover, in the U.S. the routes withthe lowest postal density are not the routes with the lowesttraffic.16 In France, on the contrary, routes with the lowestpostal density have the lowest volumes. This also explains whythere is greater heterogeneity in costs in France than in theU.S.16 This is probably linked with a wealth effect, as volumes aredriven by the wealth of the recipient (see Kolin and Davis (1999),Berthelemy and Toledano (2000)).5. INTERACTION OF THE COST DRIVERSIn this section we examine the impact of changes in postaldensity and volume per address on the average cost in each country.French average costs are derived from an engineering modelmentioned in the Appendix and described in detail in Roy(1999).The U.S. average costs are derived from an econometricallyestimated translog equation of street time.17 The equation relatesstreet time to volume per address, postal density, and the numberof addresses. The number of addresses is set as a "control"variable in the equation, allowing us to develop average costs.Table 4 presents La Poste and USPS normalized street deliverycosts for each combination of quartiles of low, medium and highpostal densities and volumes per address. Data for each country arepresented, with the U.S. values immediately below the Frenchvalues. Postal density in France is higher than in the U.S. in allquartiles and ranges from 78 addresses/hour at the low quartile to256 addresses/hour at the highest quartile. This range of postaldensities is much greater than the corresponding U.S. range of 67to 140 addresses per hour. The annual volume per address is higherin all quartiles, and its range is wider in the U.S.Table 4. 1999 La Poste and USPS Index of Average Costs*Low Postal Density (PD) Medium Postal Density High PostalDensity % Change La Poste (78 Addresses/Hour) (135 Addresses/Hour)(256 Addresses/Hour) in AC USPS (67 Addresses/Hour) (94Addresses/Hour) (140 Addresses/Hour) (due to PD)Low Volume La Poste (673 Pieces/Address/Year)1.81 1.09 0.62-66% USPS (1,090 Pieces/Address/Year) 1.76 1.28 0.92-48%Medium Volume La Poste (767 Pieces/Address/Year)1.64 1.00 0.58-65% USPS (1,448 Pieces/Address/Year) 1.35 1.00 0.73-46%High Volume La Poste (946 Pieces/Address/Year)1.40 0.87 0.52-63% USPS (1,919 Pieces/Address/Year) 1.04 0.79 0.59-43%La Poste % Change in AC (due to Vol) -23% -20% -16% USPS %Change in AC (due to Vol) -41% -38% -36%* Street Time only (Seconds per Piece) Note: Low = 25% Quartile;Medium = 50% Quartile or Median; and High = 75% Quartile.17 The specification of the estimated translog equation is:ST=0+1lnQ+2(lnQ)2+3lnD+4(lnD)2+5lnB+6(lnB)2+7(lnQ)(lnD)+8(lnQ)(lnB)+9(lnD)(lnB)Where: ST = Street TimeQ = Volume (Pieces per Address)D = Postal Density (Addresses per Hour of Fixed Time)B = AddressesThe translog equation was estimated using 1999 data from 39,737rural routes and a stratified sample of 8,300 city routes.Table 4 shows that in both countries volume is a more importantcost driver at low postal density than at high postal density. Thisis because, ceteris paribus, at low postal density the fixed costsare higher and the potential for scale economies is thereforegreater. Conversely, at high postal densities the fixed costs arelower and thus the potential for scale economies is not asgreat.Similarly, postal density is a more important cost driver inboth countries at low volume because at low volume the savings infixed costs realized from increasing postal density are spread tofewer pieces. Conversely, postal density is a less important costdriver at high volume because the savings from an increase inpostal density are spread across a greater number of1300pieces.2200 44It should be noted that the impact of postal density on cost isgreater in France than in theU.S. since France has a wider range of postal densities andlower volumes. In contrast, the impact of volume is greater in theU.S. than in France because the U.S. has lower postal densities anda greater variation in volumes. Finally, postal density appears tobe a more important driver of unit street delivery costs thanvolume over the actual ranges in France and the U.S.6. UNIT COST BEHAVIORThe La Poste simulation model and the cost function developedfor the USPS, described above, provide alternative means ofestimating average unit costs over a range of volumes per deliverypoint and postal densities. Figure 5 displays average costsgenerated with the La PosteUnit Delivery Cosst (sec/piece)simulation model and data for French postal activities. Figure 6displays the average unit costs generated with the cost functionfor the USPS.Figure 5: Unit Delivery Costs as a Function of Volume and PostalDensity Derived from La Poste Delivery Cost Simulation Model906030Yearly Volume per AddressPossible Deliveries Per Hour)Figure 6: Unit Delivery Costs as a Function of Volume and PostalDensity Derived from a Translog Model with USPS DataThe remarkably similar shapes of the two surfaces demonstrate aconvergence of simulation and regression approaches to estimatingthe behavior of delivery costs with postal density and volume peraddress as cost drivers. The difference in unit delivery costsvalues reflect different input prices in the two countries.The figures visually demonstrate the relationship between lowpostal density and/or low volume and high average unit costs; andconversely the relationship between high postal density and/or highvolume and low average unit costs. Also, the figures exhibit therapid change in unit delivery costs as either volume or densityincrease. However, once either high volume or high density isachieved, the opportunities for further reductions in average unitcosts by increases in either volume or density are minimal.7. CONCLUSIONSThe analysis of delivery costs for France and the U.S.demonstrates that street delivery costs are more heterogeneous inFrance than in the U.S. Ceteris paribus, France is more vulnerableto inefficient entry than the U.S.The heterogeneity of delivery costs is driven by differences involume, geographical characteristics and quality of deliveryservice. The concept of postal density captures the nonvolumefactors in a single measure. Rationalizing street delivery cost bydecreasing the quality of delivery service can have a profoundimpact on the postal density and consequently, on deliverycost.Due to this rationalization of delivery cost in the U.S., thepostal densities of the most sparsely populated areas are higherthan the densities of the most sparsely populated areas ofFrance.Postal density appears to be a more important driver of unitstreet delivery costs than volume over the actual ranges in Franceand the U.S. Furthermore, high postal densities reduce the impactof volume on unit street delivery costs, and high volume reducesthe impact of postal density.APPENDIX:Delivery DataFranceThe delivery data for La Poste are obtained for each deliveryarea. A delivery area represents a postcode (or several postcodesin some cases). The territory is divided into nearly 6000 deliveryareas. Each area averages 12 routes (with of course a very highdeviation)18. The unit costs (expressed in seconds and normalizedas explained) are estimated by an engineering model19 to allow forsimulations over variations of traffic. They are obtained thefollowing way: The information system allows the description ofeach area with geographic characteristics (population, number ofstops, number of delivery points, surface, length of streets orroads) and traffic. The delivery model constructed by La Poste useshundred of parameters, and allows the calculation of the unit costsof street delivery with an error of less than three percent in eacharea. At this stage, one unit cost is calculated for each area. Itgives a quite aggregate view of street costs compared to thefineness of U.S. costs. In reality, each area is quiteheterogeneous: it generally consists of a small town and anoutlying area with different geographical characteristics. To havea more precise view of unit costs (and to have a better level ofcomparison with U.S. costs which are by route instead of bygeographic area), the costs are then divided into two groups perarea. We finally obtain 12,000 unit costs in 12,000 areas.20 Thesubareas are then ranked on the criteria of increasing unit costs.They are re-aggregated into increments of five percent of traffic:the first five percent of traffic delivered is reached with 23areas, and the last five percent of traffic is obtained with 900areas.U.S.U.S.delivery data are from the City Carrier Cost System andthe Rural National Mail Count System.21 City carriers make up 72percent of the routes and rural carriers make up theremainder.22The City Carrier System contains a stratified sample of 8,300routes and the 1999 Rural National Mail Count System provides dataon 39,737 rural routes. The data elements used in this study are:the number of addresses served; the number of stops; (for citycarriers only) volume per address, and address per kilometer (forrural carriers only). City carrier time is derived from the USPSCost Segments and Components Report for FY 1999 and the averagetime is18 Paris has 20 delivery areas and more than 1000 routes, andmany delivery areas, like in Lozre only have one route.19 See Roy 1999 "A Technico Economic Analysis of the Costs ofOutside Work in Postal Delivery". This model is used in the costaccounting system to determine costs by products.20 These sub-areas represent an average of six routes perarea.21 See PRC Docket No. R2000-1.22 Approximately 30 percent of rural routes serve non-ruralurban suburbs.calculated and used for all city carrier routes. Rural carriertime is included in the rural mail count system.Variable and Fixed CostsWe divide out-of-office delivery costs into their componentsusing the method developed by the U.S. Postal Service.23 Load timeis included in the variable costs. For simplicity the variableportion of access and travel to and from the beginning of the routeare ignored. The remaining time is fixed and includes the timebetween stops (route time and the fixed portion of access) and thefixed portion of travel time.23 See PRC Docket No. R2000-1.REFERENCESBerthlmy, Franoise L. and Jolle Toledano. 2000. "In France,Mail Goes Where the Money and Business Are." In Current Directionsin Postal Reform, edited by Michael A. Crew and Paul R.Kleindorfer. Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic PublishersCohen, Robert, William Ferguson, John Waller, and SpyrosXenakis. 2000. "Universal Service without a Monopoly." In CurrentDirections in Postal Reform, edited by Michael A. Crew and Paul R.Kleindorfer. Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic PublishersCohen, Robert, Carla Pace, Matthew Robinson, GennaroScarfiglieri, Vincenzo Visco Comandini, John Waller and SpyrosXenakis. 2002. "A Comparison of the Burden of Universal Service inItaly and the United States." In Postal and Delivery Services:Pricing, Productivity, Regulation and Strategy, edited by M.A. Crewand P.R. Kleindorfer. Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.Cremer, Helmuth, Andr Grimaud, and Jean-Jacques Laffont. 2000."The Cost of Universal Service in the Postal Sector." In CurrentDirections in Postal Reform, edited by Michael A. Crew and Paul R.Kleindorfer. Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.Cremer, Helmuth, Andr Grimaud, Jean-Pierre Florens, SarahMarcy, Bernard Roy, and Jolle Toledano. 2001. "Entry andCompetition in the Postal Market: Foundations for the Constructionof Entry Scenarios." Journal of Regulatory Economics 19 (no. 2,March): 107121.Demographia 2001, www.demographia.com/db-lonlanypar.htm.Kolin, Marshall and E. Davis. 1999. "Mail Goes Where the MoneyIs: A Study of Rural Mail Delivery in the US." In EmergingCompetition in Postal and Delivery Services, edited by Michael A.Crew and Paul R. Kleindorfer. Boston, MA: Kluwer AcademicPublishers.Roy, Bernard. 1999 "Technico-Economic Analysis of the Costs ofOutside Work in Postal Delivery." In Emerging Competition in Postaland Delivery Services, edited by Michael A. Crew and Paul R.Kleindorfer. Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.PRC Docket No. R2000-1 USPS LR-I-1, Summary Description of USPSDevelopment of Costs by Segments and Components, FY 1998. PostalRate Commission, www.prc.gov.