Towards a General Postal Service Cost Function*Robert CohenPostal Rate CommissionCarla PacePoste ItalianeAntnia RatoCTT - Correios de PortugalMatthew RobinsonPostal Rate CommissionRicardo SantosCTT - Correios de PortugalGennaro ScarfiglieriPoste ItalianeVincenzo Visco ComandiniPoste ItalianeJohn WallerPostal Rate CommissionSpyros XenakisPostal Rate Commission*The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors anddo not necessarilyrepresent the opinions of CTT - Correios dePortugal, Poste Italiane or the Postal RateCommission.1. INTRODUCTIONMailhandling activities in the posts of industrial countries areremarkably alike. Each of the major functions (delivery, mailprocessing, transportation, and window service) is conducted usingsimilar methods and technologies. Therefore, it may be possible fora fairly simple model to explain total and unit cost differencesbetween posts. Ideally, developing a cost model for the 20 plusindustrial posts would involve collecting data on many individualcost elements from each and using regression analysis to estimatethe coefficients of a cost function. In today's environment this isimpossible because virtually all posts in industrial countriesconsider much of their operational cost data to be commerciallysensitive and will not share them.In our previous paper, Cohen, et al. (2002), we developed amodel that related unit costs to volume per capita. The model isbased on U.S. costs. More specifically, it is based on the accruedcost of the major functions and their cost elasticities withrespect to volume. A plot of that cost function reveals the classichyperbolic shape with unit costs increasing more rapidly as volumeper capita declines because of the loss of economies of scale. SeeFigure 1.In our previous paper, we made adjustments to the model to allowfor comparison with Poste Italiane. In particular, adjustments weremade for differences in labor cost, amount of worksharing, and mixof mail by shape.1 In this paper, we add an adjustment for countercosts.2 The resulting model estimate of Poste Italiane's unit costis 74 cents versus the actual value of 79 cents. It must be pointedout that the cost model is used to estimate costs over an extremerange of volume. U.S. volume per capita in 1999 was 739 pieceswhile Italy's was 115 pieces per capita. Given this range, theauthors are encouraged by the relatively small deviation of theestimate from actual.1See the Appendix to Cohen, et al. (2002).2The USPS has only 14 counters per 100,000 population, whilePoste Italiane has 24 counters per 100,000 population.Figure 1: Model Estimates of Unit CostBenchmarked by U.S. Costs and Volumes2.502.00Cost per Piece ($US)1.501.000.500.00 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800Pieces per CapitaIn this paper we examine the hypothesis that the cost modelprovides reasonable estimates of the unit costs of other posts ofindustrialized countries.3 The hypothesis cannot, however, bedirectly confirmed because we do not have sufficient cost data onother countries to compare with the model results.We provide indirect confirming evidence of the hypothesis, usingthe fact that the model implies that mail processing and deliverycosts will comprise specific percentages of total costs at specificper capita volume levels. We have obtained the actual percentagesof mail processing costs and delivery costs relative to total costsfor seven posts with which we compare the predicted percentages.Although the evidence is not conclusive, it confirms thehypothesis.We first present our model for total costs and unit costs. Wenext present the test of our hypothesis by comparing the predictedpercentages for each of the seven posts with the actualpercentages. We then produce a trend line through the data pointsand compare it with the model results. Finally, we compare actualunit revenues, and some derived unit costs, for the seven postswith the model's prediction of unit costs.The editors of the book in which our previous paper [Cohen, etal. (2002)] appears suggested that we examine the hypothesis thatthe cost model accurately describes the costs of other posts.2. THE COST MODELThe model is the same as that used by Cohen, et al. (2001)except that we now present it as a generalized cost function. Themodel assumes that there are two primary determinants of cost for apostal system: volume and size of the network. For each activity apost performs, there are volume-driven attributable costs andnetworkdriven institutional costs.To create a total cost function, we use FY 1999 U.S. PostalService data to define the relationship between costs and costdrivers. Costs for each postal activity (mail processing, delivery,etc) that can be attributed to mail volumes, are divided by totalvolume to obtain an estimate of the marginal cost.4 The remainingcosts are institutional costs that are primarily driven by the sizeof the network. Population is a reasonable proxy for the size ofthe network and therefore institutional costs are divided by theU.S. population to obtain the additional cost per person. Thisproduces annual cost functions for each of the major postalactivities and a total cost function.Since all costs are variable in the long run, it is reasonablethat non-delivery institutional costs would decline over the largevolume range we explore with this model. For purposes of thisanalysis we assume that 25 percent of non-delivery institutionalcosts would be volume variable.5No portion of delivery institutional costs is considered to bevolume variable, however, because route structure generally doesnot change as volume drops. As long as coverage is relatively high,carriers will have to cover their entire route. Thus, fixeddelivery costs would not be expected to drop until volume percapita were so low that the resulting very low coverage allowedcarriers to skip parts of their routes.4Attributable costs using the PRC cost treatment are greater thanvolume variable costs. Consequently, the estimate is slightlyhigher than the true marginal cost.5The results are not very sensitive to this assumption as can beseen in Cohen, et al. (2001).The cost function in U.S. dollars is:Variable InstitutionalMail Processing = 0.1032V + 2.10P Delivery = 0.0525V + 42.24PTransportation = 0.0200V + 0.92P Window Service = 0.0092V + 4.64PAll Other costs = 0.0241V + 24.41P Total costs = 0.2089V + 74.31Pwhere V = Volume and P = Population.It can be seen that the total cost of providing postal servicein the U.S. for FY 1999 was 20.89 cents per piece plus $74.31 perperson. The total cost for other countries can be estimated bysubstituting volume and population into the above formula.The total cost function can be used to estimate average unitcost by dividing the terms by V:Average Unit Cost = 0.2089 + (74.31 P / V). This can be restatedin terms of V / P, or pieces per capita (ppc), as:Average Unit Cost = 0.2089 + (74.31 / ppc).The percent of total cost for each function included in themodel and cost elasticity (with respect to volume) are shown inTable 1.The model assumes constant unit variable costs. Thus, whenvolume is reduced total variable cost is reduced by the samepercentage. At lower per capita volumes, the ratio of fixed tovariable cost increases and the cost elasticities decrease (becausea greater proportion of total costs is fixed). Similarly, the modelassumes a constant coefficient for population.Table 1: FY 1999 USPS Percent of Total Cost and Elasticity (withrespect to Volume) of the MajoraSource: Postal Rate Commission Docket R2000-1bIncludes both in and out of office activities.cDoes not include intra city transportation costs.The U.S. cost elasticities in Table 1, when applied to theaccrued costs of each function, determine the coefficients in thecost function, which in turn generate the unique shape of the unitcost function (Figure 1). Further, these coefficients determine thepercent of total cost that comes from mail processing and deliveryat a specific volume per capita.The total cost for an individual country can be expressed as afunction of pieces per capita by rewriting the above basic totalcost equation as:Total Cost for country "i" = (0.2089 Pi)(V/Pi) + 74.31 Pi,where Pi = population for country "i",0.2089Pi = slope74.31Pi = intercept. The values of the slope (rate of increasein total costs) and intercept (institutional costs) are directlyrelated to the population of the country. If country A has twice asmany inhabitants as country B, then the slope and intercept of A'scost function will be twice as large as the slope and intercept ofB's cost function.Figure 2 displays the total cost curves as functions of piecesper capita for each of the countries in the sample. The differencesin slopes and intercepts reflect population differences. If totalvolume, instead of pieces per capita, were displayed on thevertical axis, then the Y-intercepts would remain unchanged but thecost curves would be parallel. Although Figure 2 shows a family oftotal costs curves, Figure 1 displays a single unit cost curvebecause the unit cost curve depends on only one variable, piecesper capita.Figure 2. Total Cost Functions for Sampled PostsNot Adjusted for Structural Differences0 100 200 300 400 500 600Pieces per Capita3. ADJUSTMENTSTo estimate the cost of a post using the model, it is necessaryto take into account labor cost differences between the U.S. PostalService and the given post. The test of our hypothesis, however,does not involve predicting unit costs of other posts. It involvespredicting the percentage of total cost devoted to mail processingand delivery. Thus, labor costs do not need to be adjusted.The total percentage of mail processing costs would have to beadjusted if worksharing, automation, or mail mix had significantlydifferent impacts on mail processing costs. We have adjusted mailprocessing costs for La Poste and Posti Finland. Both France andFinland include the costs of cancellation and mail preparation incounter costs. Because the U.S. Postal Service classifies thesecosts as part of mail processing, we adjust the percentages of mailprocessing costs upward for France and Finland to reflect a similartreatment. This has no effect on total costs, and therefore onlyaffects the mail processing percentage.The number of deliveries per week varies among the posts in thesample (Canada, Finland, and Portugal deliver five times per week,Great Britain delivers 12 times weekly in urban areas and six inrural areas). Consequently it is necessary to adjust the percentageof delivery costs for these posts to the level it would be with sixdeliveries per week (as in the U.S.) When the percentage ofdelivery cost is increased or decreased for a given post, thepercentage of mail processing cost is decreased or increasedaccordingly.64.CONFIRMING THE HYPOTHESIS4.1DataCanada Post, Consignia (Royal Mail), Posti Finland and La Postesupplied the percentages of delivery and mail processing costs tous. The authors supplied the data for CTT Correios de Portugal andPoste Italiane. Only La Poste delivers unaddressed mail separatelyfrom normal mail. Consequently, the volumes and percentages oftotal cost for La Poste do not include unaddressed mail.Unaddressed mail is included in the calculations for otherposts.The cost percentages reflect labor and non labor costs, exceptfor Germany. The Deutsche Post percentages are derived fromworkforce full time equivalents contained in its annual report forFY 2001 and an internal Post Italiane study on German deliveryoperations developed in part from meetings with Deutsche Postmanagement. The Deutsche Post annual report provides the totalnumber of full time equivalents involved in postal operations andthe Poste Italiane document provides the number involved indelivery operations. While this is a proxy for labor and non laborcosts, it is considered realistic since in the U.S., the use ofworkforce full time equivalents provide estimates within a fewpercentage points of those calculated with labor and non laborcosts.6The population density (or more specifically the postal density-- the average time it takes to travel between addresses) of acountry has an impact on street delivery costs. Ideally we couldadjust for this if data were available. (See Bernard, et al.2002).4.2 Empirical FindingsEmpirical findings from the investigation are presented inFigure 3. The top line represents delivery cost percentage (oftotal cost) as a function of pieces per capita as predicted by ourcost model. The bottom line represents the same for mail processingcosts.Figure 3: Functional Percentage of Total CostsBenchmarked by U.S. Costs and VolumesPercentage of Total Costs706050403020100 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800Pieces per CapitaWith the exception of the lowest volume post (Poste Italiane)the model's predicted percentages are close to the actualpercentages for delivery. We think Poste Italiane, a very lowvolume post, may have a somewhat lower percentage of delivery coststhan predicted owing to low coverage on very low volume routesespecially in rural areas. When carriers deliver to only a smallnumber of stops on a route they tend to cover the route in a waymore similar to a "traveling salesman" than following a fixed routepast every stop. Thus, there may be less fixed costs on theseroutes than indicated by the elasticities embedded in the costmodel based on U.S. costs, which reflect very high coverage levels.If this conjecture is correct, then Italy's delivery percentagescould be adjusted upwards (by an unknown amount) towards thepredicted value and their mail processing costs would then have tobe adjusted downwards. A downward adjustment would also improveItaly's relation to the mail processing prediction but movePortugal further away. Some of the deviation for Italy and Portugalmay be due to the fact that they have proportionally much largerretail operations involving collection and acceptance than the U.S.and other posts. For example, Portugal's retail post officeoperations account for 21 percent of total costs, while in theU.S. they account for approximately six percent. Poste Italianealso has a relatively large percentage of costs in collection andacceptance, 15 percent. Nevertheless, the authors cannot explainwhy Portugal's percentage of mail processing cost is so low incomparison to the other posts in the sample.A significant virtue of these curves is that they areindependent of the price of labor. Thus, by using this evaluationtechnique, we are able to avoid the need for obtaining productivehourly costs translated into dollars using purchasing powerparities.It appears that other factors, for which adjustments are notmade, do not cause significant differences. This could be becausethese factors do not vary significantly from the U.S., do not drivecosts significantly, or tend to cancel each other out.4.3 Trend AnalysisThe bold lines in Figure 4 display trend curves for the actualprocessing and delivery cost percentages from the test countries.7These curves were generated using Excel. They have virtually thesame shape as the curves predicted by the model and further confirmthe fit between the model and the data. The low delivery costpercentage of the low volume per capita country, Italy, pulls thedelivery trend line down away from the predicted line. The factthat the actual mail processing percentages for Italy and Portugalare about equidistant below and above the predicted values causesthe mail processing trend line to match the model line at lowvolumes despite relatively large errors. These disparities at lowvolumes between the trend and model lines reinforce our belief thatthe model is less useful in predicting costs for low per capitavolume posts than it is for medium to high volume per capita posts.It is to be expected that the accuracy of predictions will diminishas the range over which the predictions are made increases.These trend lines were selected because they best fit the data.For delivery percentages, the trend line is y=46.943e-0.0004x withan R2 of 0.78. For mail processing percentages the trend line isy=10.869Ln(x) - 38.407 with an R2 of 0.69.Figure 4: Functional Percentage of Total Costs with RegressionCurves7060Percentage of Total Costs50403020100 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800Pieces per Capita5. ESTIMATED UNIT COSTSIn order to compare unit costs, it is desirable to make theadjustments we have discussed above plus an adjustment forproductive hourly wage in purchasing power parities (PPP). Data forthese adjustments were not available, except for Italy. TheU.S. values used in making adjustments for Poste Italiane dataare listed in the appendix. In the absence of actual cost data, wecompare model cost results to actual revenues.For the posts in our sample we have used the model to estimateunit costs and adjusted only for deliveries per week (Canada,Finland, U.K., and Portugal.) In Table 2, we compare theseestimates with average revenue per piece converted to U.S. centsusing OECD's PPP for 1999.Table 2: Comparison of Model Estimated Coststo Actual Revenueper Piece for 1999(U.S. cents)Model Cost Revenue Estimates per PieceaCanada 43 41 Finland 34 39 France 38b 40b Germany 50 57 Italy 9079c Portugal 62 54U.K. 46 50U.S. 31caFrom annual reports and Posts of authors, 2000 forPortugal b Includes unaddressed mailcActual cost per pieceThe largest discrepancy appears to be Italy. We know, however,that the Post Italiane productive hourly wage is three quarters ofthat of the U.S. Postal Service. As stated in the introduction,when we adjust for Italian labor costs, worksharing, mail mix, andnumber of counters, we get a modeled unit cost of 74 cents.6. CONCLUSIONSThe principal conclusion is that empirical evidence corroboratesthe validity of this model because the predicted functionalpercentages of costs are reasonably close to actual values. SeeFigure 3. In particular, the general shape of the unit cost curve(with respect to per capita volume) appears to be valid for theposts of industrialized countries sampled. See Figure 1. The model,however, is a more accurate predictor of the cost behavior ofmedium to large per capita volume posts than for small per capitavolume posts. The model also demonstrates that both volume andpopulation are important explanatory factors of postal costs.Clearly, additional research is warranted. Regulators andoperators in any industrialized country are encouraged to use thedata in the appendix on U.S. cost characteristics to makeadjustments to the model and determine if the model forecasts costswith reasonable accuracy. Of course, we would not expect exactcorrespondence even after adjustments are made owing to differencesin efficiency and service quality.Appendix: FY 1999 USPS Operational StatisticsProductive hourly wage: $23.87644Mail mix by shape: 72 percent letters and cards, 26percent flats, 1 percent parcelsPercentage of mail with some worksharing: 72Percentage of letters barcoded by mailers: 56Percentage of letters barcoded by USPS: 32Percentage of flats barcoded by mailers: 38Percentage of mail not delivered (i.e. Post Office Boxmail): 21.4Average postal density (addresses per fixed street hour):100.5Counter Costs: 5.6 percentREFERENCESBernard, Stephane, Robert Cohen, Matthew Robinson, Bernard Roy,Jelle Toledano, John Waller, and Spyros Xenakis. 2002. "DeliveryCost Heterogeneity and Vulnerability." Paper presented at the 10thConference on Postal and Delivery Economics, Potsdam, Germany.Cohen, Robert, William Ferguson, John Waller and Spyros Xenakis.2001 "The Impact of Using Worksharing to Liberalize a PostalMarket." Paper presented at Wissenschaftliches Institut frKommunikationsdienste GmbH, 6th Kenigswinter Seminar on PostalEconomics, Liberalization of Postal Markets.Cohen, Robert, Carla Pace, Matthew Robinson, GennaroScarfiglieri, Vincenzo Visco Comandini, John Waller and SpyrosXenakis. 2002. "A Comparison of the Burden of Universal Service inItaly and the United States." In Postal and Delivery Services:Pricing, Productivity, Regulation and Strategy, edited by M.A. Crewand P.R. Kleindorfer. Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.PRC Docket No. R2000-1 USPS LR-I-481, FY 1999 and TY MailProcessing Unit Costs by Shape with Piggyback Factors (Update toLR-I-81 & 464 Provided in Response to POR No. 116) Using FY 99Base Year and Alternative IOCS Methodology