LEGAL SERVICES CORPORATION BOARD OF DIRECTORSCOMMENTS ON THE OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL'S SEMIANNUAL REPORTTO THE CONGRESS FOR THE PERIODOCTOBER 1, 2000 - MARCH 31, 2001MAY 31, 2001FOREWORDI am pleased to transmit the comments of the Legal ServicesCorporation ("LSC" or "Corporation") Board of Directors ("Board")regarding the Semiannual Report of LSC's Office of InspectorGeneral ("OIG") for the six-month period of October 1, 2000 throughMarch 31, 2001.LSC's Board recognizes the value of the Inspector Generalfunction and remains committed to working with the OIG to achieveour goal of providing high quality legal assistance to the poor ofour nation. We note, in particular, our support of the OIG's workto strengthen LSC recipients' compliance efforts and Case ServiceReporting, which has resulted in increased accuracy in thedocumentation of the performance of LSC recipients.Douglas S. Eakeley, Chairman Legal Services Corporation May 31,2001MESSAGE OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORSDuring the reporting period, LSC made continued progress in itsState Planning Initiative. Building State Justice Communities: AState Planning Report from the Legal Services Corporation, issuedin March 2001, highlights the state planning successes of 18 statesin developing coordinated plans to increase resources and servicesto clients statewide.1 The report shows the variety of ways inwhich these states have strengthened their equal justice systems,providing models and inspiration for others. All 18 states improvedaccess to justice for low-income people, strengthened the qualityof legal services delivered by programs,2 and forged new and deeperbonds among stakeholder partners in each state's civil justicecommunity.Since 1998, LSC has restructured legal services programs in 24states, and the number of LSC grant recipients has decreased from269 in 1997, to 167 anticipated grantees (Basic Field and NativeAmerican grants) in calendar year 2002.LSC's State Planning Initiative is premised on the belief thatLSC-funded programs must:?? function as a concerted, coherent, closely coordinated legalassistance delivery system;?? include other equal justice partners in the creation andimplementation of this coordinated delivery system;?? develop additional resources to expand legal services;?? incorporate the views of clients and key partners in makingmajor decisions abouthow to design and implement a comprehensive system of highquality legal services;and?? target legal services resources to achieve the greatestmeasure of equal justice for clients and economically disadvantagedpeople.LSC's ultimate goal in this regard is to help grantees createstate communities of justice - integrated and coordinated legalservices delivery systems which1 California, Colorado, Florida, Illinois, Indiana, Maine,Maryland, Minnesota, Missouri, New Hampshire, New Jersey, Ohio,Oregon, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Utah, Washington, WestVirginia.2 'Programs', 'recipients', and 'grantees' are usedinterchangeably in this report to refer to recipients of LSCfunding.comprehensively improve grantees' delivery of services toclients. LSC has made significant progress in this effort andcontinues to assist recipients in improving the quality of legalservices nationwide.To further its goal of expanding recipients' use of technology,LSC is proceeding with its second round of Technology InitiativeGrants, it has consulted with grantees on the selection of casemanagement software which will accommodate merger-relatedtechnology needs, and it has provided continued technology trainingto recipients.BACKGROUNDLegal Services CorporationThe Legal Services Corporation is a private, non-profitcorporation established in the District of Columbia by the LegalServices Corporation Act of 1974, as amended ("the LSC Act"), 3 toprovide financial support for legal assistance in civil proceedingsto persons unable to afford legal services. LSC is governed by aneleven-member bipartisan Board of Directors appointed by thePresident of the United States with the advice and consent of theSenate. The Board appoints LSC's President, who serves as theCorporation's chief executive officer, subject to general policiesestablished by the Board.The 1988 Amendments to the Inspector General Act of 1978 ("1978Act") required LSC to establish an Office of Inspector General("OIG") and extended specific provisions of the 1978 Act to LSC.Accordingly, such an office was established by and for LSC. TheInspector General is appointed by, reports to and serves under thegeneral supervision of LSC's Board of Directors.Funding and Grant-Making ActivitiesLSC received a Congressional appropriation of $330 million forFY 2001, with which it made grants to 207 programs to provide freelegal services to indigent persons across the country. Of the fundsreceived for FY 2001, $7-million will be used for client self helpand information technology.3 42 U.S.C. ? ? 2996-2996l.MANAGEMENT INITIATIVESDuring this reporting period, LSC continued its efforts toimprove the efficiency of its competitive grant award system andthe effectiveness of the delivery of legal assistance by itsinitiative for statewide planning and coordination of legalservices. The Corporation continued to demonstrate its ability toensure both compliance with program rules and regulations, and themaintenance of high quality legal assistance to eligibleclients.Strategic DirectionsLSC continues to implement its five (5) year Strategic DirectionPlan ("the Plan"). Adopted by the Board of Directors on January 28,2000, the Plan commits LSC to dramatically enhance the impact oflegal services programs throughout the nation by improving accessto legal services while enhancing their quality. The Planemphasizes LSC's State Planning Initiative, as well as theincreased use of technology, as significant strategies forexpanding access to, and availability of, civil legal servicesthroughout the United States. LSC is developing performancemeasures to assess the ongoing effectiveness of its strategic plan,and will undertake pilot projects in up to five programs in2001.Competition and State PlanningLSC's primary goals for the calendar year 2002 grantscompetition are to refine the Request for Proposal ("RFP"),simplify the applicant process for competing for LSC grants, andobtain applicant information essential to maintaining a qualitylegal services delivery system.Several refinements have been incorporated into the RFP for 2002funding, including: questions on applicant staff diversity; staffrecruitment and retention strategies; staff training; and applicantstrategic planning. RFP inquiries on technology are streamlined andincorporated into the RFP form for technology, which allows LSC toassess the technological capacities of the delivery system. The RFPwas also modified to obtain more comprehensive information onsub-grantees that receive twenty-five percent (25%) or more of theLSC grant award, and sub-grantees that deliver a full range ofservices to a specific geographic area within the applicant'sservice area. Evaluation weights assigned to RFP topics have beenrestructured to correspond with the modifications made to theRFP.LSC continues to make the most use of available technology. TheRFP is fully electronic and is available from the Internet atwww.ain.lsc.gov. The technology used to capture and evaluateinformation in response to the RFP permits LSC to compile andassess key information about the delivery system at the program,state, regional, and national level.LSC continues to provide technical assistance to grantees inmany areas of state planning including, but not limited to,development and implementation of state plans, resourcedevelopment, and mergers. During this reporting period, LSCretained consultants to assist planning efforts in Florida, NorthCarolina, New York, Missouri, Ohio, South Carolina, and Wisconsin.Technical assistance contracts supported resource developmentactivities in Alabama, Louisiana, Nebraska and the District ofColumbia. In March, LSC organized and sponsored a national 2-daytraining on mergers attended by 90 participants.These efforts have resulted in the development of additionalresources for civil legal services, new and more efficient ways ofproviding legal information and advice to low-income persons, andmore effective and economical structures to assure equal justice togreater numbers of Americans.Technology EffortsLSC is in the process of reviewing and awarding its second roundof Technology Initiative Grants ("TIGs"). It has received 95applications with total grant requests of over $19-million, forprojects totaling $36 million. Twenty-three of these requests arefor implementation of statewide web site templates developed in theFY 2000 grant competition. If funded, these projects would providethe potential for half of the states to provide clients with legalinformation and pro se resources on a statewide basis.LSC continues to provide assistance to former recipients ofTIGs. In October 2000 and March 2001, LSC hosted meetings of TIGrecipients to discuss the administration of the grants.Additionally, LSC has created a web site for the collaboration ofTIG recipients.At the Equal Justice Conference ("EJC") held in March 2001 inSan Diego, LSC and the Project for the Future of Equal Justice heldthe second Case Management Software pre-conference. The primarygoal of this gathering was to address issues generated by LSC'sState Planning Initiative and resulting mergers. At the meeting,representatives from LSC and TIG recipients discussed the creationof central databases for a program, region, or state, using variousapplications such as WAN, SQL or Citrix.During the reporting period, LSC provided technology training atthe Southeast Projects Directors meeting; the Committee On RegionalTraining for Michigan, Ohio, and West Virginia; the Indiana Accessto Justice Conference; the EJC; the National Legal Aid and DefenderAssociation; and the Management Information Exchange. It alsoprovided assistance to several states with the development ofstatewide technology plans. Finally, in October 2000, LSC, inconjunction with the National Center for State Courts, the StateJustice Institute, and the Open Society Institute, convened aconference of representatives from legal services, state courts,bar associations, and other community partners to forgecollaborations to advance pro se efforts in eight states.Program VisitsTo assure the provision of high quality legal assistance toeligible clients, LSC's Office of Program Performance ("OPP")instituted a written protocol for conducting program reviews. LSCpublished a Program Review Guide to aid staff and consultants whileconducting on site recipient reviews. All program reviews areconducted to enhance the purpose of the Corporation's StrategicDirection Plan. The on site visits are conducted for the purpose ofprogram monitoring and development, to solve problems, and todevelop new strategies for expanding access and enhancing qualityof services to clients.Ten programs were chosen for visits in 2001. One visit wasconducted in April; one is scheduled for May; two are scheduled forJune; two are scheduled for July; and one is scheduled forSeptember. Dates for three additional visits will be selected inthe near future.'The Results Project''The Results Project' is aimed at gauging, for the first time,the type and volume of work, other than the handling of cases, inwhich LSC-funded programs engage. LSC has long noted that itsprograms provide referrals and community legal education, engage inoutreach, and work cooperatively with other groups to address theneeds of the LSC client community. LSC recognizes that this workentails great effort and produces significant results. 'The ResultsProject' will enable LSC to describe and quantify that work. LSChas endeavored to minimize the burden on programs in the collectionof this information through the design of a carefully developeddata collection instrument, the collection of information only oncea year, and through efforts to modify existing case managementsystems to allow for collection of this information.The project attempts to identify the number of people served bythe following types of work, and obtain descriptions of programs'efforts and of successes.?? Referrals; ?? Community legal education presentations; ??Community legal education materials, articles and web sites; ?? Prose clinics, distribution of pro se materials including thetechnologically enhancedapproaches; ?? Indirect services such as training to other (lay)service providers and collaborativeservice delivery models; and ?? Other services such as mediationand alternative dispute resolution work.The draft of the instrument to collect this information wastested by 22 programs. LSC is in the process of reviewing the testresults in order to make appropriate improvements. Regular datacollection is scheduled to begin July 1, 2001.DiversityTo better serve clients and strengthen program staff andleadership sensitivity to client communities, LSC has convened aseries of conferences on diversity. These conferences will enableprogram staff to examine the degree to which gender, race,ethnicity and age have adversely affected the ability of someclients to obtain critical legal services from LSC recipients. Thefirst conference was held on March 31, 2001 in conjunction with the2001 Equal Justice Conference, and others are planned later in2001.Client ConferenceIn April 2001, just beyond the reporting period, LSC held athree-day conference in Hershey, Pennsylvania, entitled "CreatingClient-Centered State Communities of Justice". The conferenceprovided a forum for the exchange of ideas about methods by whichthe legal services community can better empower, strengthen andenhance the lives of legal services clients. It convened client andcommunity advocates, as well as legal services staff who embracethe concept of client-centered legal services.Sixteen (16) conference papers were written by legal servicesleaders across the country on topics that enhanced and enlightenedthe conference discussions. The conference was attended by adiverse group of more than seventy (70) individuals, comprised ofclients and client advocates, members of the bench and the academiccommunity, LSC board members and staff, and national partners.Conference participants reflected a true cross section of thecountry, with clients and advocates attending from more thantwenty-eight (28) states. As part of the participant solicitationprocess, applicants were asked to commit to lead and participate inat least one statewide activity that will promote positive, lastingchange in the client community.LSC will publish a report on the conference in June 2001. Thereport will capture the ideas, recommendations, and strategies fromthe conference and serve as a possible guide to help clients andadvocates facilitate client-centered legal services delivery intheir communities.Characteristics of Model Intake SystemsAs a part of its effort to encourage and promote innovativeprocedures, LSC is producing a listing of draft characteristics ofideal telephone intake, advice, and referral systems. LSC and itsOIG have, for many years, been committed to promoting thesesystems. In arriving at the draft characteristics, LSC staffconsidered a variety of documents describing standards for intakesystems, including those published by the ABA and AARP. LSC alsosolicited input from leaders in the area of intake systems andpresented the draft characteristics during a workshop on "BestPractices" at the March ABA/NLADA Equal Justice Conference.In early May 2001, shortly beyond the reporting period, LSC'sOffice of Program Performance ("OPP") notified programs that it wasaccepting comments to draft characteristics of a telephone intakeadvice and referral system. The Draft Characteristics were postedon the LSC Recipient Information Network and were sent to allprogram directors via electronic mail. After considering commentsfrom recipients and advocates, OPP intends to publish thecharacteristics in a Program Letter and use them as the bestpractice standard when evaluating programs' intake systems.Program Mergers/ConsolidationsIn anticipation of many program mergers or consolidations due tothe reconfiguration of service areas for 2002, LSC, along with theNational Legal Aid and Defender Association and the ManagementInformation Exchange sponsored a "Making Mergers Work" workshopduring the March ABA/NLADA Equal Justice Conference. Approximately70 participants examined the practicalities of mergers andconsolidations; considered ways in which new service areaconfigurations can better serve clients; prepared for thechallenges of joining different program cultures and emerging withan effective larger organization; and talked with peers about thespecific opportunities and problems they face. LSC staff presenteda session on LSC program requirements for mergers andconsolidations.The Office of Program Performance has revised internalprocedures for handling program mergers/consolidations. LSC grantconditions require that programs obtain LSC approval of a merger orconsolidation before LSC will allow the transfer of the grant fromone program to another. LSC's internal procedures for clearingmergers and consolidations involve the work of several officeswithin LSC including the Executive Office, the Office of InspectorGeneral, the Office of Compliance and Enforcement, the Office ofLegal Affairs and the Office of Information Management, with theOffice of Program Performance having primary responsibility for theclearance process.Shortly beyond the reporting period in May 2001, the Office ofProgram Performance held a special telephonic conference for 2002grant applicants involved in mergers/consolidations. This sessionfocused on how programs should complete grant applications, and thenew grant application requirements for applicants which anticipatesub-granting part of the LSC grant during the grant year.Rulemaking ActivitiesDuring the reporting period, LSC issued a revised final rule onrecipient fund balances, 44 CFR Part 1628. Under the final rule,published on November 7, 2000, recipients will be permitted tocarry over fund balances of 10% or less; will be able to seek LSCapproval for carryover balances of between 10% and 25%; and will begenerally prohibited from retaining fund balances of over 25%,except in three very limited and especially compellingcircumstances. The exceptions would be where the fund balanceoverage results from the receipt of insurance proceeds; real estatesale proceeds; or proceeds received as a result of a lawsuit inwhich the recipient was a party. The new rule became effective onDecember 7, 2000.In addition, LSC has begun conducting a thorough review of LSC'sregulations. This project is consistent with the five-yearstrategic plan, "LSC Strategic Directions 2000 -2005" which, amongother things, requires reviewing LSC's regulatory compliancerequirements for efficiency, unnecessary duplication and burden,and implications for the delivery of high quality, appropriatelegal services. As part of this project, LSC solicited publiccomment via notices published in the Federal Register and on theLSC Website in November 2000. The review effort is still underwayand a final report is expected to be presented to the LSC Board forconsideration in June 2001.TABLE 1Management Report on Office of Inspector General Audits ofGrantees Issued With Questioned Costs For the Six Month PeriodEnding March 31, 2001 TABLE 2Management Report on Audit Reports Issued During The Six MonthPeriod Ending March 31, 2001, With Recommendations That Funds BePut to Better Use By Management Agreed to in a ManagementDecision