United States General Accounting OfficeInternal ControlGAOExposure DraftDecember 2000Maintaining Effective Control Over Employee Time and AttendanceReportingGAO01186GAbbreviationsINTRODUCTIONIn recent years significant changes in work place habits andtechnological advances have affected the manner in which time andattendance (T&A) reporting is accomplished. For example, moreflexible work schedules and places, and the trend in government tostreamline operations have provided a major impetus for changes inT&A systems. However, perhaps the most significant influence onthese changes is advancing technology and the increased use ofautomation. The Government Paperwork Elimination Act (GPEA)encourages the movement toward paperless applications and the useof electronic signatures. Although GPEA focuses on electronicsystems regarding information obtained from and provided to sourcesoutside the government, it provides an additional impetus toagencies to seek further applications of paperless systems and useof electronic signatures.Trends toward increased automation and workplace flexibilityhave changed the operating environment. However, the need for goodinternal control continues to exist. To keep abreast of thechanges, especially those in automation, we have revised thisdocument to emphasize the attention that should remain regardingeffective internal control in T&A systems. This document offerssuggestions for taking advantage of the advancements in automatedT&A systems and updates the previous guidance to incorporateguidance offered in response to agency requests.1As advancing technologies continue, managers have greaterflexibility in designing and implementing T&A systems bestsuited for their agencies. In designing and implementing newT&A systems or components of existing systems, managementshould strive for costbeneficial systems and related internalcontrol.The traditional work schedule followed by civilian employeesdiffers from those generally followed by members on active duty ofthe armed services. Because traditional work schedules influenceinternal control in T&A systems, this document contains twomajor parts, the first dealing with civilian employees who areexpected to be "working," usually during certain times and thesecond part dealing with members of the active duty armed serviceswho are expected to be in a "duty status" and thus on call 24 hoursa day. Part I, civilian employees, provides guidance for civilianemployees, and part II, military service members, provides guidancefor military service members. Employees who are paid regardless oftheir presence or absence and who do not accrue leave under 5U.S.C. 6301 et seq. (e.g., certain political appointees) are exemptfrom the provisions of this document.2Questions on or interpretations of any material in this documentmay be submitted to the Managing Director, Financial Management andAssurance, U.S. General Accounting Office, 441 G Street NW,Washington, DC 20548.1When issued in final, this document will replace our 1996revision to Title 6, "Pay, Leave, and Allowances," of the GAOPolicyandProceduresManualforGuidanceofFederalAgencies.2See Comptroller General Decision B123698 (May 10, 1978).(BLANK)PART I: CIVILIAN EMPLOYEESINTERNAL CONTROL OBJECTIVES IN T&A SYSTEMSThe primary objective of a T&A system is to ensure thathours worked, hours in pay status, and hours absent are properlyreported. Reliable data are important to accurately compute andaccount for computed pay, leave, and allowances. To achieve thisobjective, management should have in place an internal controlsystem that provides reasonable assurance that (1) T&Atransactions are properly authorized and approved and (2) T&Adata are completely and accurately recorded and retained.T&A Transactions Are Properly Authorized and ApprovedThe nature and extent of T&A transaction approvals andcontrols can vary among T&A systems. Fully automated systems,for example, may require fewer approvals than manual systemsbecause of automated edits and controls, and the use of automatedsignatures. Nevertheless, the nature and extent of T&Aapprovals must be such that management has assurance thatsupervisors or other officials know they are accountable for theapprovals of an employee's work time and absences. This helpsensure that accurate T&A information is recorded and reportedfor the purposes of computing pay and allowances.Primary responsibility for authorizing and approving T&Atransactions rests with the employee's supervisor, who approves theemployee's T&A reports. Timekeepers3 and supervisors must beaware of the work time and absence of employees for whom they areresponsible to ensure the reliability of T&A data. To theextent practical, changes to an employee's normal work scheduleshould generally be approved prior to the change actuallyoccurring. Unanticipated changes should be reviewed for approval ordisapproval as soon as reasonably possible.T&A Data Are Complete and AccurateBecause most federal civilian employees are paid on an hourlybasis (or fractions of an hour) and earn and charge leave on thatbasis, a complete and accurate record of the time an employee worksmust be retained as an official agency record available for reviewor inspection. To provide a basis for pay, leave, and benefits, therecords must include aggregate hours of regular time, other time(e.g., overtime, credit hours, or compensatory time), and leave.4To help ensure accuracy, the completed records must be reviewed andapproved by the supervisor (or other equivalent official). In anautomated environment, system edits and other automated testscan3The traditional T&A system normally involved a timekeeperwho was responsible for assisting supervisors in recording andverifying employees' work time and absences. New T&A systemscan reduce or even eliminate timekeepers' duties and shift theresponsibilities to employees or supervisors. Regardless of thechanges made, recording accurate T&A information remains theprimary control objective.4Traditionally, daily arrival and departure times were requiredto be recorded. Although it is not required that daily records bemaintained, agency management may choose to do so by usingsignin/signout sheets or other means.assist the supervisor in his or her review and verify thatrecorded work time is accurate and allowable.RELIANCE ON INTERNAL CONTROLS IN A T&A SYSTEMAs T&A systems evolve toward increasingly automated methodsof recording and reporting employee work and leave times, it isimportant to implement and maintain a welldefined system thatprovides management with the confidence that controls are workingas designed. This can be done by:Having a welldefined organizational structure and flow ofT&A data with clearly written policies and procedures settingforth the responsibilities of employees, timekeepers (ifapplicable), and supervisors regarding recording, examining, andapproving T&A transactions.Effectively applying available technology and concepts toachieve efficient and effective T&A system processes inaccordance with applicable requirements and the environment inwhich the agency operates.Having the ability to record payroll costs byappropriation, organizational code, and work activity to facilitateapplication of required cost accounting for financial and programmanagement.Reviewing and testing all aspects of the T&A systems'processing procedures and controls in sufficient scope, depth, andfrequency to provide reasonable assurance that key procedures andcontrols are working and effective and that data integrity ismaintained.Agencies' T&A systems are subject to periodic review underthe Federal Managers' Financial Integrity Act of 1982 (FMFIA) (31U.S.C. 3512(c), (d)).5RECORDING AND MAINTAINING COMPLETE AND ACCURATE T&ARECORDSRequired T&A InformationThe following T&A information and documentation should berecorded and maintained for each employee for each pay period:1. employee name and unique identifying number (e.g., a socialsecurity number),5StandardsforInternalControlintheFederalGovernment(GAO/AIMD0021.3.1)was revised in November 1999, and is available on the Internet, GAOhome page (www.gao.gov) under "Other Publications." It is alsoavailable in hard copy by calling (202) 5126000 or at the U.S.General Accounting Office, 700 4th Street NW, Room 1100,Washington, D.C. In addition, the Office of Management and Budget(OMB) requirements for evaluating financial systems and controlsare in OMB Circular A123, InternalControlSystems(June 1995)and OMBCircular A127, FinancialManagementSystems(July 1993). These OMB andGAO issuances establish the criteria and rules for assessing andreporting annually on the status of agency systems andcontrols.2.pay period number or dates,3.hours worked,4.hours of premium pay, by type, to which the employee isentitled,5.dates and number of hours of leave (by type), credithours, and compensatory hours earned and used,66.evidence of approval by an authorized official (usuallythe supervisor),7.any required supporting documentation or records forabsences, and8.other information agencies believe necessary.A T&A record containing all required data elements can be(1) a manually completed hard copy document, (2) an automated fileretained electronically, or (3) a combination of automated andmanual records. The T&A information can be obtained using anumber of different methods, including but not limited topreprinted or designed T&A forms; other standard forms;internal memorandums; emails; employee, timekeeper, or supervisornotations (for example, that might result from phoneconversations); or other formats so long as the documents arecontrolled and retained as the official T&A record ofemployees. The data contained in the T&A records should belinked to accounting records and provide the necessary support forfinancial reporting and allocation of costs.Recording T&A DataAgency policy must affix accountability for recording theT&A data referred to in the previous section. The data may berecorded by the1.individual employee,2.timekeeper,3.supervisor, or4.a combination of the three.Agency policy must assign accountability for recording andmaintaining T&A data referred to in the previous section. Ifthe employee is not recording his or her T&A data, the basisfor recording the data could be (1) the timekeeper's orsupervisor's observation, (2) time clocks, or other automatedtimekeeping devices, where not prohibited by law, or (3) otherapplicable techniques. The person recording the T&A dataacknowledges responsibility for the accuracy of the recordeddata.The point at which T&A data are recorded can vary amongdifferent T&A systems. For example, T&A data may berecorded (1) daily, (2) when deviations occur from an individual'sor agency's established work schedule, or (3) at the end of the payperiod. Regardless of the timing of recording T&A data,management must have in place a system of control techniques thatgives reasonable assurance that the recorded information reflectstime worked, leave taken, or other absences.6Cumulative balances of available leave by type per employee arerequired to be maintained on record. Agencies may maintain thesecumulative balances on biweekly or pay period T&A records whichshow the available balances for the pay period ending. Examples ofthe types of leave on such T&A records include, but are notlimited to, annual, sick, and family friendly leave.Supplementary T&A RecordsSupplementary T&A records, containing information notpreviously discussed, shall be completed and maintained. Examplesof such records include those for establishing (1) work schedules,7(2) flexiplace arrangements,8 (3) cumulative leave balancesavailable for use by type,(4)overtime, (5) compensatory time earned and used, (6)credit hours earned and used under an alternative work schedule,and (7) number of unscheduled duty hours. The records mustshow(1)an employee's pay period schedules indicating plannedstart and stop work times and hours per day for an established workschedule, (2) the aggregate hours (or fractions of hours) and daysthe employees worked regular hours, worked overtime, took leave, orused earned compensatory time or credit hours, and (3) thesupervisor's approval. In order for the agency to properly documentand calculate an employee's overtime pay entitlements under 5U.S.C. chapters 55 and 61 and 29 U.S.C. 201 et seq., the recordsmust distinguish between regular overtime and irregular oroccasional overtime.Employees Temporarily Assigned to Another AgencyWhen an employee is on temporary assignment to another agency,the agency to which the employee is detailed must record T&Adata for the employee in accordance with these requirements. Itmust also report the information to the employee's home agencypromptly to facilitate disbursement of pay by the home agency.Access to T&A InformationAccess to T&A information should be limited to thoseauthorized to access the information.AUTHORIZING AND APPROVING T&A TRANSACTIONSAttestations, Verifications, and ApprovalsThis section (1) defines attestations, verifications, andapprovals and (2) discusses how attestations, verifications, andapprovals can be achieved in a manual or automated T&A systemenvironment.Attestation refers to an employee affirming T&A data to betrue, correct, and accurate. Verification is a confirmation,usually by the timekeeper or supervisor, that recorded informationis true, correct, and accurate to the best of his/her knowledge.Approval is the supervisor's, other equivalent official's, orhigher level manager's agreement, ratification, or concurrenceto(1) a planned work schedule and leave of employee or (2) actualT&A data. Such approvals represent that the actual workschedule recorded by the employee or timekeeper is to the bestof7Federal agencies can allow employees to vary their daily arrivaland departure times and, under some options, to vary the length oftheir workday or workweek. In all cases, fulltime employees arerequired to work or otherwise account for 80 hours each biweeklypay period (5 U.S.C. 6120 et seq.).8See Office of Personnel Management's (OPM) Memorandum forPersonnel Directors on the subject of Alternative WorkplaceArrangements, October 21, 1993.the approving official's knowledge true, correct, and accurate,and in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, and legaldecisions. The approving official acknowledges awareness andunderstanding of his/her responsibility when approving T&Adata.The evidence of attestations, verifications, and approvals willof necessity differ between manual and automated systems. In manualsystems, attestations, verifications, and approvals are usuallyshown by a signature or initial of an individual on a hard copydocument. In automated systems, they are represented by what can bereferred to generically as electronic signatures.9 There are manytypes of electronic signature technologies offering differentdegrees of confidence, control, and security. In selecting and/ordeveloping, and implementing a particular electronic signaturetechnology for an automated T&A application, management mustassess the risks associated with the loss, misuse, or compromise ofthe electronic T&A information and signatures compared to thebenefits, costs, and effort associated with selecting and/ordeveloping and managing the automated systems and electronicsignatures.10 See the appendix for a further explanation aboutelectronic signatures and GAO's review of such applications.Authorizing an Employee's Work ScheduleWhen (1) an employee's work schedule differs from the agencywideschedule established by management or (2) reflects a flexible workprogram, an employee's work schedule should be approved by thesupervisor or the official most knowledgeable of the employee'sschedule in advance of the period when the plan takes effect. Ifthe schedule is not approved in advance, the plan should beapproved as soon after the start of the pay period as possible.Approval must be granted for overtime before the work has beenperformed when feasible and, when not feasible, as soon as possibleafter the work has been performed. Care must be taken todistinguish between regular overtime and irregular overtime oroccasional overtime (or compensatory time in lieu of overtime,where allowed) in order for the agency to properly document andcalculate an employee's overtime pay entitlements under 5 U.S.C.chapters 55 and 61 and 29 U.S.C. 201 et seq.Approval of LeaveApproval of leave should be made by the employee's supervisorbefore the leave is taken. If leave is not approved in advance, itshould be reviewed for approval or disapproval as soon asreasonably possible after taken.9The GPEA defines "electronic signature" as a method of signingan electronic message that (1) identifies and authenticates aparticular person as the source of the electronic message and (2)indicates such person's approval of the information contained inthe message.10GPEA requires agencies to comply with the guidance issued by OMBregarding automated systems that maintain electronic information asa substitute for paper and use of electronic signatures. OMB issuedthe guidance in Memorandum M0010, dated April 25, 2000. A 29pageattachment to the memorandum contains the details of the guidance.Also, as part of the OMB guidance, the Department of Justice wascharged with developing practical guidance on legal considerationsrelated to agencies' use of electronic filing and record keeping.The department issued LegalConsiderationsinDesigningandImplementingElectronicProcesses:AGuideforFederalAgenciesin November 2000.Attestation and Verification by Employees and TimekeepersThe employee and timekeeper, if any, are not required to attestor verify T&A reports and related documents. However, ifmanagement requires such attestations and/or verifications, theyshould be performed as close to the end of the pay period aspossible. When not possible until after the end of the pay period,a copy of the T&A report and related documents, whenapplicable, should be provided to the employee promptly forattestation and to the timekeeper promptly for verification. Theemployee and/or timekeeper should promptly disclose anydiscrepancies to the supervisor. The supervisor should promptlyresolve such discrepancies.Approval of T&A Reports and Related RecordsAll T&A reports and related supporting documents (e.g.,overtime pay authorizations) must be reviewed and approved by anauthorized official. Review and approval should be made by theofficial, normally the immediate supervisor, most knowledgeable ofthe time worked and absence of the employee involved. Approval ofT&A reports and related documents should be based on personalobservation, work output, timekeeper verification, checking dataagainst other independent sources, reliance on other controls, or acombination of these methods.The official most knowledgeable of the time worked shouldapprove any overtime or compensatory time. Care should be taken (1)to ensure that the overtime was approved, preferably in advance,and (2) that the amount and type of overtime (regular orirregular), credit hours, and compensatory time is accuratelyrecorded.If practical, T&A data must be approved at the end of thelast day of the pay period or later. When this is not feasiblebecause of payroll processing requirements to meet establishedpaydays, T&A data must be prepared and approved as close to theend of the pay period as possible to still allow processing of thepayroll by payday.Adjustment or Corrections After the T&A Period EndsAdjustments or corrections required because of changes afterT&A data were approved must be made in the payroll system andreflected in pay for the pay period to which the changes apply,when possible. When not possible, adjustments must be made as soonafter discovery as practical. Any changes must be approved by anauthorizing official before being entered into the payrollsystem.SelfApproval of T&A ReportsIn general, employees may not approve their own T&A data.However, the head of an agency (or designee) may authorizeparticular individuals to approve their own T&A data in certainsituations or if the individual is a high level manager (such asthe head of a large unit within the agency). In these situations,an official authorized by the agency head (or designee) must grantadvance authority in writing, and the agency must ensure thateffective controls are in place to ensure the proper reporting ofT&A data.Exceptions to the general prohibition of employees approvingtheir own T&A data are intended to apply when it is notfeasible to have T&A data approved by a supervisor. Theseexceptions include but are not necessarily limited to (1) employeesworking alone at a remote site for long periods and (2) employeesbased at the same duty station as their supervisors or timekeepersbut frequently at work sites away from the duty station. In othersituations when it is not practical for the supervisor to approveT&A data promptly, the employee may be paid and the supervisormay subsequently review and approve the data.TRANSMITTING T&A INFORMATION TO PAYROLLT&A information must be transmitted to the payroll systemfor all employees or, under exceptionbased systems, for employeeswho have changes to their normal work schedules. While the choiceof methods used to transmit the T&A data may be based oncosteffectiveness and management information needs, the system usedto transmit the information must protect T&A data fromunauthorized change or alteration and must generate a record of anychange made. Any change to previously attested to and approved datamust be reviewed by and attested to by the employee whose data waschanged. The changed data must also be reviewed by and approved byan authorized official.EXCEPTIONBASED SYSTEMSExceptionbased T&A systems, as the name implies, require payperiod recording of arrival and departure times only if materialvariances11 from preestablished work schedules occur. Employees'schedules are established, either through management designatedwork schedules or by mutual agreement between employees andmanagement. When employees' arrival and departure times for a payperiod are established, these schedules become the basis forrecorded T&A data unless material variances or deviationsoccur. As previously noted, if no material variances occur, arrivaland departure times and hours worked per day need not berecorded.Material variances or deviations must be approved by thesupervisor before the change occurs, if feasible, or promptly afteroccurring, if not feasible. As part of their approval of thechange, supervisors or designees must verify that the dates andamounts of material changes have been recorded in the appropriateT&A record. However, in either case (material variance or novariance) each employee's T&A record must be approved by thesupervisor or comparable official.Several alternatives exist for recording changes to establishedschedules. Changes can be noted by recording arrival and departuretimes directly on an employee's time sheet, recording arrival anddeparture times on a centrally maintained timein/timeout log usedby many employees, or noting the number of hours and minutes of thedeviation in a record that the supervisor maintains. The methodselected by management to record the deviations should be the mostefficient and effective one under the circumstances.Unless otherwise designated by management, material variances ordeviations from an established schedule for recording purposes arethose that differ by 1 hour or more during a planned workday orflex day. However, if leave is used, a deviation of less than 1hour could be considered material. For example, if an employeearrives 30 minutes late, but works 30 minutes past the planneddeparture time, this would be considered an immaterial variationand need not be recorded. On the other hand, if the employeechooses to request annual or sick leave rather than to work for thetime absent, then a material deviation for recording purposes hasoccurred.ALTERNATIVE WORKPLACE ARRANGEMENTSAlternative workplace arrangements12 involve working atlocations other than the traditional government office. Locationsof alternative workplaces are usually the employee's home ortelecenters.13 Although numerous benefits exist for both the agencyand employees participating in alternative workplaces (such asemployee moral and lower commuting costs), flexible workplace is amanagement option, not an employee benefit. Employees who work atalternative work sites should have a written agreement with theirsupervisors stipulating, among other items, the period of time theagreement is in effect, days in which the employee will work at thealternative site, work assignments and performance, work schedule,and time and attendance.As a basis for approving T&A data, supervisors are requiredto obtain reasonable assurance that employees working at remotesites are working when scheduled and that T&A informationaccurately reflects time worked and absences from scheduled toursof duty. Numerous techniques are available to the supervisor toobtain this assurance. For example, reviewing the work output ofthe employee and occasional phone call or visits to theemployee.12Other terms used to refer to alternative workplace arrangementsor locations of work are "flexible workplace," "flexiplace," and"telecommuting."13Telecenters are facilities away from the traditional governmentoffice that are equipped with workstations, telephones, andcomputers among other items that are shared by employees ofmultiple agencies.PART II: MILITARY SERVICE MEMBERSACTIVE MILITARY PERSONNELActive military personnel are considered to be on duty 24 hoursa day. Because the nature of some military assignments makes aconfirmation of the presence at duty stations difficult, if notimpossible, the recording of presence for duty and of specifichours during which duty is performed each day is not required. Thisis similar to exceptionbased T&A systems explained earlier inthis document. Most active duty military personnel followexceptionbased systems. However, superiors are expected to be awareof the presence and absence of service members for whom they areresponsible. When a service member is on temporary assignment toanother component of the armed services or to a civilian agency,the entity to which the service member is detailed must providetime and attendance recording for the service member and report theinformation to his or her home component promptly to facilitatepayment of basic pay and allowances by (or through) the homecomponent.Absence reports must be maintained daily to indicate thoseservice members who are to be charged leave and those who are notpresent for duty but who should be. Examples of reports that mightcontain such data are "morning" or "day" reports, strength reports,unit diaries, and other similar reports.Information on absences which affect pay should be compiled eachpay period and be transmitted to the payroll system. Without suchinformation, the payroll system may mistakenly pay the member forunauthorized pay and allowances. The following requirements forreview and approval must be met:1.Reports of such information and related supportingdocuments must be reviewed and approved by a designated authorizingofficial. The official must be aware of the responsibilities he orshe is taking regarding the accuracy of the reports.2.Approvals of such reports will be made at the end of thelast day of the pay period whenever possible. When this is notpossible because of payroll processing requirements to meetestablished paydays, documents must be approved as close to the endof the pay period as possible.3.Approval must be done in accordance with guidance foundin the subsection "Attestations, Verifications, and Approvals" ofsection "Authorizing and Approving T&A Transactions" of thisdocument.4.Any adjustments required because of changes in reportedabsences after the reports were approved and transmitted to thepayroll system must be made and reflected in the pay period towhich the changes apply, when possible, or when not possible,adjusted as soon as possible, preferably in the next payperiod.Any changes must be approved by the authorizing official priorto being entered into the payroll system. Service members may notapprove their own absence reports unless prior authority to do sois granted in writing by an authorized official.When feasible (as in an office setting or environment),costeffective, and applicable, attendance reporting and relatedinternal controls set forth in "Part I: Civilian Employees" shouldbe instituted for service members to the extent management deemsappropriate.MILITARY RESERVISTST&A controls for military reservists depend largely on thenature of the work. If they have defined work schedules and are notexpected to be available for duty on a roundtheclock basis, theT&A requirements for civilian employees are operative andshould be used. If however they are employed similar to those whoare on active duty or are actually on active duty, then thecontrols in the subsection "Active Military Personnel" areoperative and should be used.APPENDIX I: GAO'S REVIEW OF ELECTRONIC SIGNATURESAPPLICATIONSGAO has been asked by several federal agencies to reviewelectronic signature systems used in financial management systemsand to discuss how such systems should be evaluated. Because ofsome of the unique risks associated with highly automatedenvironments, traditional data integrity techniques, such aspassword and user identification based systems, used toauthenticate an individual may not provide the same degree ofassurance as that provided by paperbased systems. For example, in apaperbased system, an individual's signature on the paper documentis a timetested method of showing that an individual intended to bebound by the terms and conditions in the paper document. However,in an electronic world, where adequate controls have not beenimplemented, the similar approach of having an individual's nameappended to a data record does not provide the same assurancebecause, for example, the terms and conditions can be changedwithout obtaining the individual's approval of the changesmade.When reviewing electronic signature systems, we evaluate whethera system generates electronic signatures that represent anindividual's or an entity's intent to be bound. To do this, wedetermine whether the electronic signature system providesreasonable assurance that the signature produced by the system is(1) unique to the signer, (2) under the signer's sole control,(3) capable of being verified, and (4) linked to the data insuch a manner that, if the data are changed, the signature isinvalidated. Adopting these criteria facilitates our evaluation ofhow well the electronic signature system addresses its threats andhelps identify vulnerabilities that may be present in the system.We have also found these criteria useful since they are technologyneutral (can be used regardless of the technology used to producethe signature) and allow for a variety of implementation methods,depending of the degree of risk associated with a givenapplication.When deciding on an electronic signature system for T&Adata, agencies should identify and/or develop and document thecriteria used in the selection of the signature system and how thecriteria and the selected system complies with the GPEA definitionof an electronic signature. In addition, the agency's riskassessment process (as called for in the OMB guidance14) shoulddisclose the risks considered that would prevent the system fromsuccessfully complying with the criteria selected by the agency.Without developing the criteria that the system should meet andthen effectively assessing the risks, agencies could adoptsignature systems that will not provide the necessary dataintegrity.15(922289)14 See footnote 10.A recently issued GAO report (InformationSecurity:SeriousandWidespreadWeaknessesPersistat FederalAgencies.GAO/AIMD00295, September 6, 2000) showed that in 24 agencies,physical and logical access controls were not effective inpreventing or detecting system intrusions or misuse. Theseweaknesses have a significant adverse impact on the ability ofautomated systems to ensure the necessary data integrity.Ordering InformationThe first copy of each GAO report is free. Additional copies ofreports are $2 each. A check or money order should be made out tothe Superintendent of Documents. VISA and MasterCard credit cardsare accepted, also.Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single addressare discounted 25 percent.Orders by mail:U.S. General Accounting OfficeP.O. Box 37050 Washington, DC 20013Orders by visiting: Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th andG Sts. NW)U.S. General Accounting Office Washington, DCOrders by phone: (202) 512-6000 fax: (202) 512-6061 TDD (202)512-2537Each day, GAO issues a list of newly available reports andtestimony. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or anylist from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using atouchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how toobtain these lists.Orders by Internet: For information on how to access GAO reportson the Internet, send an e-mail message with "info" in the bodyto:info@www.gao.govor visit GAO's World Wide Web home page at:http://www.gao.govContact one:To Report Fraud, Web site: http://www.gao.gov/fraudnet/fraudnet.htmWaste, or Abuse in e-mail: fraudnet@gao.gov 1-800-424-5454 (automated answering system)