(held May 31 and June 1 in Washington. D.C.)OVERVIEWOn May 31 and June 1, 2001, approximately fifty equal justiceadvocates gathered in Washington, DC for LSC's and NLADA's firstnational conference on diversity in the legal services community.Focusing on broad aspects of diversity - including, among others,age, gender, disability, sexual orientation, race, ethnicity andnational origin - participants examined diversity-related strengthsand challenges facing clients, staff and program leaders (bothlocal and national), and brainstormed about potential strategiesfor addressing the challenges. To ensure that the dialogue wouldinclude the variety of issues and individuals in the legal servicescommunity, NLADA and LSC selected participants to reflect both theleadership and emerging leadership of the field. To the maximumextent possible, participants broadly mirrored the full populationof the national community. Attendance at the meeting was limited toabout 50 people to foster candid conversation. Two members of theKarp Consulting Group (Deborah Howard and Yvonne Shinhoster Lamb)facilitated the two-day session.All participants understood that, while the assembled groupreflected the demographics of the community, they did not speak forevery member of the broad-based legal services community. It shouldbe noted also that no clients were involved in this event. Thus thevision and strategies suggested here must be seen and considered inthe context of a series of dialogues on diversity that NLADA andLSC are holding throughout the year and in the context of thereports issued following those conversations.Participants began the conference by setting goals. Theyincluded the following:Identify and prioritize diversity-related issues thatexist within the legal services community.Identify key diversity-related challenges that existinternally and externally.Identify obstacles within our legal services communitythat cause and/or perpetuate bias, oppression, andunfairness.Brainstorm strategies to address the identified issues,overcome the challenges and obstacles, and to promote justice,fairness, and inclusion.In order to facilitate the ability of the participants to workfrom an agreed upon set of facts about themselves, the facilitatorsdivided the conferees into three groups. Each group represented atime in the history of legal services -- The Past (20 years ago),The Present and The Future (10 years from now). Each group was thenasked to answer the same set of questions about their particularera. The thoughts and observations of each group are reportedbelow.The PastKey constituents included clients and community-basedorganizations, local bar associations, client advisory committees,LSC, other funders (such as United Way) and policy advocates likeNLADA.The client community included a high number of welfarerecipients, was majority white and female with some regionaldifferences and included some undocumented individuals, elderly,non-working poor and prisoners.Program staff was less diverse. Fewer women worked inlegal services, particularly as lawyers. Management then was almostexclusively white, male, younger and inexperienced. There werefewer indigenous staff members.Program staff members were treated with a "sink or swim"attitude. Although they were expected to handle large caseloadsalmost immediately, they were also freer to pursue an issue areaand develop themselves professionally through that pursuit. Programleaders believed that poverty could be eradicated and accordinglystaff energies were often focused on impact work rather than onaccess. Legal services organizations were centered on theeradication of poverty and promoting equality and justice andindependence.Although there was concern about diversity, there wasneither real dedication to making it happen nor any realaccountability with one exception -- the importance of hiringAfrican American attorneys and having African Americanrepresentation on boards in regions where African Americanpopulations resided. Other than that, little attention was given toretaining and promoting people of color, women, people withdisabilities and others who reflected the client community.However, there was an awareness of the need to hire nonlegal stafffrom the communities being served and this meant that staffworkforces often consisted of male, white attorneys and femaleparaprofessional staff.Some litigation was discrimination-based, i.e., schooldesegregation and voting rights cases.Staff training was usually not a priority for individualprograms and was generally provided by state and national back-upcenters.Some national organizations recognized the need forgreater gender diversity and pursued activities to bring women intothe legal services workforce.The PresentToday's key constituents include governing and policyboards and clients (those being served and those not being served).Other constituents are Congress, state and local bar associations,court systems, new funders (IOLTA, state government, Department ofJustice Violence Against Women Office) "old" funders (LSC, UnitedWay), state and local governments, staff, social and human servicesorganizations, and civil rights and other advocacy groups (most ofwhich did not exist 20 years ago).The client community has changed. Women, senior citizensand the working poor still need our services, but new groups haveemerged. Programs are now expected to serve gay, lesbian andtransgendered persons, persons with AIDS, children, homelesspeople, more immigrants (many of whom do not speak English and havecomplex problems), persons with disabilities, unemployed persons,people of color, rural and urban low-income people, people fromdepressed areas, and those with mental illness.Our staffs include more women, people with disabilities,individuals from the community, eligible clients, gay, lesbian andtransgendered persons, people of color, people from diverseeconomic backgrounds, and single and married parents. These staffmembers tend to embrace the belief that each person who needs alawyer should have one, and that this is critical to moving peopleout of poverty. However, although motivated by the desire to serveand empower all people with legal problems, programs pragmaticallyrecognize the need to prioritize and focus their legal work on thecommunity's most serious problems.The Present values include a commitment to quality workand respect for clients.Today's programs emphasize such activities as trainingand CLE opportunities for staff, mentoring, team building andstrategic planning. Programs are exploring flexible work schedules,incentive awards, higher salaries and loan forgiveness initiatives.Staff are encouraged to be active in the community and in barassociation activities.Many programs hold diversity training sessions for staffand boards. Recruitment and retention efforts often reflect theimportance of a diverse workplace and the commitment of board andstaff to this value. Client communities are more diverse andprograms have more bilingual staff members. Offices are moreaccessible to people with disabilities in part because of theAmericans with Disabilities Act. In some programs, managementstructures have become broader to accommodate new supervisors andapproaches. Some managers have shown themselves willing to addressuncomfortable issues, give up power and make difficult financialcommitments to achieve a diverse work environment. Nonetheless,serious diversity challenges continue to affect ourcommunity.A concern in the Present is translating the nationaldialogue on diversity to local action. How can programs strengthentheir efforts to hire and retain a diverse staff as well as developdiverse leadership? How do we encourage programs to hire people ofcolor, women, people with disabilities, gays and lesbians and othernonmajority employees? How do we create opportunities forminorities and women (and younger staff) to advance? How do weengage Boards of Directors in these efforts?Today's diversity approaches stress inclusion of peopleof color, people with disabilities, gays, lesbians, older peopleand women. In the Present we recognize that barriers are notexcuses. We realize that diversity can help programs reach clientsin a more appropriate and useful way, and we recognize the need toincrease staff communication skills including fluency in languagesother than English. We acknowledge that sharing power is often keyto achieving diversity in program leadership.The FutureKey constituents will include older and aging clients.The client population will be multinational due to the continuinginflux of immigrants. There will be more women, children andemployed people along with those with mental healthneeds.Community partnerships will expand, enhanced by thegrowth of state justice communities and the many stakeholdersengaged in state planning. The importance and impact of non-LSCfunders will increase.Staff members will reflect the community population andinclude more people with second and third languages and individualswho are immigrants or firstgeneration Americans. We will employmore people who are not lawyers and those embarking on second orthird careers. Our leadership will reflect the expanded diversityin the general program population.There will be a greater emphasis on technology skills.Office schedules will be more flexible (to accommodate staff) andnon-traditional (to accommodate clients). Programs will gain highervisibility in multicultural communities.The legal services community will expand its hiring,retention and training activities in the multicultural community.Innovative loan forgiveness programs will attract diverse staff. Itwill nurture a cadre of multiculturally competent and innovativeleaders. Diversity will be reflected in our community's everydayculture. Partnerships with non-traditional organizations will growand new definitions of diversity and leadership will be crafted. Wewill pursue affirmativechallenges to institutional oppression and disparate treatment.We will concern ourselves with the clash between groups as a resultof changing demographics, and with the clash between "the law" andour vision for inclusion as a justice imperative.THE NEED FOR A DIVERSE WORKFORCE WITHIN THE LEGAL SERVICESCOMMUNITYTurning to the importance of diversity, participants agreed thatgiving diversity concerns their time, energy, attention andresources will generate big dividends. Participants agreed that adiverse staff creates a better product and strengthens client trustin the program. They felt that a diverse environment fosterspersonal growth and leads to an appreciation of differences inothers. Diversity allows us to tap into human genius, inspirationand excitement. It makes us aware of the special needs ofdisenfranchised groups. It empowers clients and staff, strengthensthe organization and improves ties to other groups.However, participants also agreed that a highly diverse staff isnot achieved without certain difficulties. Diversity "pioneers"often feel the fatigue and isolation of being the only or among afew people of color, women, persons with disabilities, gays orother representatives of minority groups in their office.Proponents of increased diversity may face criticism from staff orsupervisors for "spending too much time on diversity." Since legalservices people often think of themselves as "progressives" whodon't need further education on issues of inclusion, makingdiversity work within programs is not easy and requires the supportand the guidance of committed leaders. Helping staff and boardsarrive at a common vision necessitates honest and sometimesdifficult conversations.All participants agreed on the following:Turning words into action requires establishing goals andsetting realistic timeframes and benchmarks (without setting an enddate);Success is easier to obtain if people are not madedefensive;Framing diversity efforts in positive and practical termswill allow proponents to move beyond the "moral imperative"approach;Budgets and other resources must be revised to supportthe new effort;Policies will need to be strengthened to accommodate moreaggressive and urgent strategies.Building and retaining a diverse staff and board is a majorchallenge for most programs. Many conferees believe that increasingsalaries and benefits and developing loan forgiveness programs willgo a long way to attracting a more diverse staff. Seeingopportunities for advancement and leadership positions in programsis critical to retaining women, people of color and otherindividuals who contribute to a diverse staff. An active andauthentic commitment to diversity throughout each program isessential. A core group can begin the work, but structural andprogrammatic changes -- mentoring, opportunities to talk about realproblems and see solutions implemented, power sharing, diverseboards of Directors, new definitions of leadership --will benecessary to achieve lasting change. All conferees agreed that aprogram's belief in the value of diversity is best shown by theextent to which it devotes time, money and people to achievingit.CRITICAL ISSUESAfter identifying the benefits and challenges of focusing ondiversity and developing strategies to maximize the benefits andovercome the challenges, participants identified internal andexternal issues that they wanted to spend more time discussing.Internal issues selected for further discussion included thefollowing:Recruitment and retention of diverseleadership/governanceRecruitment and retention of minoritiesPerception that programs have withdrawn fromdiscrimination-based advocacyThe top external issues included:Lack of a common definition/vision ofdiversityLoss of trust among communities because of perceptionthat programs are no longer dealing with discrimination-basedissues (and resulting tension between African-Americans andHispanics)Making justice communities more diverse, inclusive andmulticulturally competentCreating organizational cultures to address a broaderrange of legal issues than we do now1Conferees agreed that leadership is broader than just"management" and that the concept of leadership rests on powersharing. Conferees further noted that possibilities for promotionamong women and members of "disenfranchised groups" must be inplace to ensure that "diversity" goes beyond race. Additionally,women managers and minority managers cannot be held to unreasonableexpectations and higher standards than those applied toheterosexual white men.Conferees believe that programmatic growth rests on a commondefinition and vision of diversity and earmarking resources so thatgoals are attained. Programs need to come up with innovative waysof supporting people who are advocates for diversity, includingcharging certain staff members to "reach out" to others to overcomepossibly hidden discrimination (such as discrimination members ofreligious groups and gays/lesbians/bi-sexual and transgenderpersons). Sensitivity to differences must be constantly encouraged.We should be particularly careful not to refer clients elsewheremerely because their issues or situations are unpopular. Programsshould consider reengaging in discrimination-based advocacy if thatapproach has been abandoned or overlooked in recent years.1Participants gave issues 3 and 4 the same number of votes, tyingthem for third place.Conferees found that programs lacked a common definition andvision of diversity. Some felt that there had been loss of trust byclients from "disenfranchised" groups because of a belief thatlegal services programs have pulled away from discrimination-basedinitiatives. With respect to challenges at the local level,conferees discussed the need for programs to create cultures thataddress more complex issues (for example, mental health and raceissues). On a broader level, conferees agreed that we must work toensure that both individual state justice communities and thebroader national counterpart becomes more diverse, inclusive andmulticulturally competent. Participants agreed that in order toidentify and serve groups that remain isolated, we need to broadenour language bases, bring more qualified support staff to ourprograms, use community leaders and be sensitive to tension betweendisenfranchised communities.VISION FOR SUCCESSAfter prioritizing their primary issues, conferees then listedindicators by which success in achieving diverse communities ofjustice could be defined. Indicators are grouped by topic andsummarized by theme.LeadershipIndicators of success -- Our senior management includes morewomen, gays, lesbians, people of color, older people and peoplewith disabilities. Leaders are held accountable for progress inmeeting goals that ensure our programs and state justicecommunities are diverse throughout, maintaining a "glitteringmosaic." From novel power-sharing arrangements, new leaders andleadership models emerge. Local and national initiatives areestablished to nurture and promote them.Program BoardsIndicators of success --Boards contain representatives from agreater variety of groups. National, state and local program boardsreflect the diversity of the communities they serve.State Justice CommunitiesIndicators of success --We endorse a common vision of diversityand goal for achievement on the national, state and local levels,and diversity issues are included in every state plan. Effectivepolicies that implement diversity goals are adopted throughout eachstate. Our goals and related efforts as contained in state plansare based on a deeper understanding of client demographicspublished in the new census material. We have crafted innovativestrategies for reaching severely marginalized communities and ourstatistics show that they are working. Program staff andstakeholders are engaged in a full range of client services,address a full-range of legal problems, and have assumed theresponsibility to create greater access and capacity to solvethem.Programs and StaffIndicators of success -- Salaries and compensation packages arecompetitive with other nonprofit and public interest organizations.Funding allocations reflect the high priority that programs placeon aggressive discrimination-based advocacy and attaining diversitygoals. Programs offer a broader range of services to the communitybased on an expanded definition of advocacy, moving beyondlitigation and conventional lawyering.National FundersIndicators of success -- Money is available to implementinnovative diversity agendas and model projects.ACTION PLANNINGParticipants drew up an action-plan that could bring about theirvision and in the context of what they anticipate the future willhold in terms of issues, funding and staff. Their ideas andinitiatives can be implemented at the local and nationallevels.Recruitment and Retention of Diverse Leadership/GovernanceSteps are initiated to allow program board membership to reflectthe clienteligible community and include representatives from thefunding community, corporations and other partners. Each board isrequired to have a standing committee to monitor board and programdiversity. A national leadership institute is created and begins toidentify, recruit, mentor and otherwise train diverse leaders; itsparticipants include at least 1-2 staff from each program; it isadequately funded. Compensation structures in legal servicesprograms anticipate long-term tenure and include pension plans,flexible schedules and benefits that reward longevity.Recruitment and Retention of MinoritiesData on retention and recruitment over the past decade isgathered and made available by national organizations; these groupscompile and disseminate information on successful diversityinitiatives. Programs begin to conduct exit interviews that seek tounderstand the reasons for staff turnover. Programs begin toestablish formal mentoring systems for staff. Personnel policieswill be revised so that they further encourage and support adiverse work environment and spell out the organization'scommitment to diversity. On the local and national levels,opportunities for professional development will grow and all staffmembers in a program, not just attorneys, take advantage ofthem.Encouraging Discrimination-Based AdvocacyDiscrimination-based advocacy is incorporated in advocateorientation and training sessions. It also becomes a focus atnational training events. State planning addressesdiscrimination-based advocacy and the infrastructure necessary toachieve it. Programs and state justice communities seek guidance onthe intersection of race and poverty from national experts andfocus on these issues in local, regional and state contexts.Programs develop more opportunities for staff to understand thediscriminatory impact on clients that can result from publicpolicies. They hire individuals to act as leaders, teachers andresources in this arena. Training strategies highlight thecentrality of discrimination-based advocacy to our mission.Developing a Common Definition and Vision of DiversityA common definition of diversity is developed. It is informed byfederal and state law, census data and innovative models from otherdisciplines while acknowledging the breadth of our communities. Itincorporates concepts of power and reduction of barriers and anaffirmative duty to address barriers. Program and justice communitysuccess is tied to and evaluated in terms of diversity initiatives.All programs commit to addressing internal diversity concerns.Addressing "Loss of Trust" Due to Perception that Programs AreNo Longer Dealing with Discrimination-Based IssuesState justice communities begin to examine how they setpriorities given changing demographics (census), new technology,emerging legal needs, commonalties among diverse communities, andseverely marginalized client populations living within in ourservice areas. Programs create staff positions charged with workingwith special client populations. Programs and their staff membersare encouraged to collaborate with the community and apply boldstrategies in addressing community problems. State justicecommunities examine leadership within a multicultural framework anduse the results in staff and leadership training. They become morecreative in raising funds for discrimination-based projects.Ensuring that Justice Communities Become Diverse, Inclusive, andMulticulturally Competent and Creating Cultures that Impact aBroader Range of Legal Issues than We Do Now (i.e., mental healthand racial justice)National organizations publicly affirm that a hallmark of thejustice community is that it is diverse, inclusive, andmulticulturally competent. A "best practices" clearinghouse isdeveloped where programs share ideas on diversity successes. Thereare regular diversity conferences for state justice communityleaders.