Discussion ofDraft RecommendationsDaniel Hungerford opened the final session of the conference byoutlining the group's ultimate task-to create researchrecommendations from conference deliberations. Before theconference, he and Daniel Pollock drafted recommendations for thesteering committee to consider. During the conference, the steeringcommittee modified those recommendations, and they were distributedto attendees for general discussion.Hungerford stated that the goal of the conference was not toachieve unanimity regarding the recommendations, but to havesignificant and general agreement. He indicated the process wouldbe to discuss the recommendations one by one, identifying any gapsor omissions and offering general comments. He emphasized that thesequence of the recommendations did not imply a priority order.Because the published recommendations will include supporting text,he encouraged the group to consider any points of clarificationthat would be instructive. Hungerford then opened the floor fordiscussion.Recommendation #1 Research on screening and intervention shouldaddress the full spectrum of alcohol problems among EDpatients.Richard Brown remarked that in many circles, "intervention" doesnot necessarily include referral, so he suggested that the firstrecommendation include "referral." Also, he said the phrase"alcohol problems" does not always include risky drinking andproblem drinking, so he suggested adding "risky and problemdrinking" to the recommendation.Daniel Hungerford noted that the supporting text could providedetail on the spectrum of alcohol problems. He suggested the mainpoint of the first recommendation was that research efforts shouldinclude the whole continuum of alcohol problems, not just a portionof the continuum such as alcohol-dependent drinkers.Jean Shope advocated that the definition of "the full spectrumof alcohol problems" include primary prevention. She recommendedthis under-standing be made explicit in the final document.Gordon Smith suggested that the recommendations should addressthe problems of poly-substance abuse.Carl Soderstrom wondered whether "alcohol problems" referred tothe spectrum of drinking problems or the medical problemsassociated with drinking.Herman Diesenhaus pointed out that hazardous drinking causes acomplex set of problems that include personal, social, and legalproblems in addition to medical problems. The phrase "alcoholproblems" includes all those problems as well as the hazardousdrinking. He noted that different pieces of the solution will liein the medical realm and in the social welfare realm. He expressedconcern about how to reflect this complexity in therecommendations.Guohua Li suggested changing the phrase "among ED patients" to"in the emergency setting" because alcohol problems are not limitedto patients. Perhaps the recommendations should address alcoholproblems among providers and physicians.Stephen Hargarten thought that the term "alcohol-relatedproblems" would appeal to clinicians more than "alcohol problems"because they see those problems in their practices. He said thatincluding "related" in terms gives the sense of broadeningthem.Richard Ries said he did not believe that screening for alcoholneuropathy was intended to be part of the recommendation. Hesuggested that the recommendation be clear that it is addressingalcohol use disorders or problems, not for medical careconsequences.Hungerford replied that screening for specific medical careconsequences was not part of the recommendation, but thatconsequence items may be used in the screening. He added that broadscreening would identify people with medical conditions as well. Hefound thatscreening with a low cut point on the AUDIT identified morepeople with severe alcohol problems and alcohol dependence than didnot using a uniform screening method. He agreed that this issueneeds clarification in this recommendation.Richard Longabaugh said that the term "alcohol problems" impliesthat the patient's problem is consumption. He favored"alcohol-related problems" because consumption is not the problem.The problem is the consequences resulting from excessivedrinking.Elinor Walker endorsed the notion of using "the emergency caresetting" rather than "the ED" particularly to include focus on thepre-hospital care setting.Hungerford added that the trauma care setting should be includedas well.Li added his support to "alcohol-related problems," butsuggested another alternative, "problem drinking," which iscommonly used.Edward Bernstein pointed out that the recommendations wouldlikely stand alone for readings and come without context. With thatin mind, he suggested listing the full spectrum of alcoholproblems, from risky drinking to alcohol abuse to alcoholdependency. He felt that it would be a mistake to open this set ofresearch recommendations with a recommendation that includedscreening for withdrawal or other conditions. Another possibilitywould be to say, "the full spectrum of alcohol misuse."Recommendation #2 Screening instruments under consideration foruse in EDs should be evaluated as a component of protocols thatprovide interventions for patients.Robert Woolard supported the recommendation and noted that mostresearch on screening has involved an evaluation of screening, butnot an intervention. Trying to apply those findings to aclinicalsetting, where there is the question of training and the linkbetween the screening instruments and the intervention, becomesproblematic. Enough research has been conducted on instrumentsalone, he said, and new research should link screens withinterventions.Linda Degutis recommended amending the recommendation to read,"screening, interventions, and methods under consideration." Thenin the supporting text, she suggested addressing the differentpeople who might be doing the screening and the need to tie it tointervention.Longabaugh wondered whether the intended consumers of thedocument would include government officials, researchers,practitioners, and academicians.Hungerford answered that the summary of the conference would bepublished in an emergency medicine journal and that readers wouldinclude these groups.Daniel Pollock added that the message of the recommendationscould also be conveyed at professional meetings. The goal was toinfluence people who are in a position to make changes in thefield.Brown believed the recommendation was worded too strongly. Tohim, it was saying that work should not include screening researchin isolation. He noted that little is known about effectivescreening for certain sub-populations, so screening research stillhas its place. Although he agreed that a total research portfolioshould have a strong emphasis on intervention and not justscreening.Diesenhaus described his use of a slogan and abbreviation for atreatment strategy, "Screening, Brief Intervention, andReferral-SBIR." Research on the individual components is important,but the strategy for the emergency room setting is as follows:screen, decide if a brief intervention is called for, and if not,give a referral. Emergency setting personnel need to understand allthree components and how they are linked. He was not sure if"referral" could be included every time, but acknowledged that itis a vital part of the work.Hungerford emphasized that research on screening is needed.However, he believed research on screening instruments that is notlinked with an intervention leads to the easy assumption thatresults will be generalizable to using that screening instrument ina full protocol. The second recommendation, therefore, is intendedto point out that results from the screening literature are notnecessarily generalizable to real-world settings in which screeningwould be paired with interventions.Ries suggested that defining "SBIR" upfront might helpclinicians understand the recommendations better. If we do not, aclinician who is interested in seizures or pancreatitis couldeasily misread the wording of this recommendation. To avoid that,for this recommendation we would have to say something like,"Problematic alcohol-use screening instruments under considerationfor use in the ED should be evaluated as a component of protocolsthat provide alcohol-use interventions for patients to decreaseproblems or use."Hungerford said he understood. If we do not pre-define "SBIR,"we have to define what we are talking about with eachrecommendation. If we do define "SBIR" upfront, we make the readingmore understandable and more efficient.Gail D'Onofrio noted that in this context, we use "referral" tomean sending a patient to a specialized treatment facility.However, in emergency medicine, everyone gets a referral-to primarycare, a clinic follow-up, or another health or social service. The"referral" in SBIR could include both meanings.Hargarten's initial understanding of this recommendation wasthat screening activities for alcohol problems should be integratedwith the screening and interventions the ED does for a whole rangeof problems. He suggested that the recommendation be worded in sucha manner that this effort does not seem to be a parallelactivity.Hungerford proposed that just as screening research should becarried out in the context of protocols that include interventions,those protocols should be integrated with the whole system of EDoperations.Christopher Dunn thought the word "evaluate" made thisrecommendation vague. What would be evaluated-the usefulness of ascreen or the psychometric properties of a screen? He believed thatthe screen can have an interventive effect, so he wanted researchon whether patients fare as well with a screen as they do withbrief advice or more sophisticated techniques.David Fiellin advocated eliminating the second recommendation.To him the statement implied that screening instruments should beevaluated only as a component of protocols that provideinterventions. He believed that the statement was dangerous becausethere are research methodologies that are related to evaluatingscreening and separate ones related to evaluating interventions,and we may not want to obligate tying the two together.Thomas Babor supported technical research on screening and thewording of this recommendation. However, he raised a largerissue-the moral imperative of screening. He said that screeningsets up the expectation that something has to follow. Withoutscreening, there cannot be much intervention. He noted that therecommendation could be seen as a way of driving widespreadapplications of interventions. If that is the goal, he thought weshould be examining how to accomplish screening. There are largeobstacles to screening, and practical research on screeningimplementation, incentives, efficiency, and its ability to reachlarge numbers of people at low cost is necessary. He believed in apublic health approach to screening which means we would not do itif the yield is low. He suggested that the technical aspects ofscreening were not as fruitful topics for research as how to screenthe greatest number of patients at the lowest cost.Bernstein suggested that the recommendation not be eliminated,but rewritten to reflect the discussion.Pollock and Hungerford concurred. Hungerford added that theintent of the recommendation was not so much that integrating thescreen with the intervention gave better estimates of theperformance characteristics of the screen, but that it wouldredress the imbalance betweenresearch emphasizing the performance characteristics andresearch on operational and practical characteristics.Recommendation #3 Interventions that have shown promise in otherclinical settings should be adapted to and evaluated in emergencydepartments.Charles Bombardier wondered whether the recommendation shouldlimit evaluation only to interventions shown to be effective inother settings. There might be interventions developed specificallyfor the ED that would be worthwhile to test.Walker thought the goal of this recommendation was tode-emphasize fine-grained, developmental work and to emphasizepursuing work using available interventions.Woolard noted that the effectiveness of screening, briefinterventions, and referrals has been proven outside the emergencydepartment, but not yet in the ED. Therefore, he hoped that thesupporting text for this recommendation would include statementsabout the need for a large, multi-center trial in EDs.Longabaugh noted that new and creative interventions may bedeveloped in the ED that the rest of the field will want to adaptand explore.Walker made a plea not to adopt the abbreviation "SBIR" becauseit is already used to designate small business innovation researchgrants by federal agencies. It could be very confusing. Shesuggested "SIR" instead.Smith returned to the idea of linking alcohol interventions withthe other interventions in the ED. If there were a package ofinterventions that providers could document and be reimbursed for,that would ease acceptance by practitioners and helpinstitutionalize these new practices. Documentation would also helpensure interventions would not be repeated unnecessarily.Pollock pointed out that proving the cost-effectiveness of aspecified, well-described service in a clinical setting is acritical consideration in moving a new practice from a researchendeavor to a reimbursable service. Whether the service emerges asan adaptation from primary care or as an innovation from the ED isless important than whether it can be evaluated to the satisfactionof those who make key decisions about whether it becomes part ofstandard practice.Larry Gentilello asserted that effective treatments alreadyexist, not just treatments that "hold promise." The "promise" hasto do with the intervention's likelihood of success in the ED, notwith its success in other settings. He suggested that the wordingbe made less tentative: for example, "treatments that work shouldbe made to work in the ED."Catherine Gordon proposed that the recommendations address theissue of financing and suggested the following phrase, "Researchshould also identify the most effective and cost-effectiveinterventions and delivery mechanisms (e.g., provider types ortechnologies)." She said this type of information is absolutelycritical for insurers.Pollock asked Gordon whether research on alcohol interventionshad to be done in a specific clinical setting in order forinterventions provided in that setting to qualify forreimbursement. He also asked how Medicare distinguishes betweenprevention and treatment for the purposes of authorizingreimbursement.Gordon explained that because Medicare is prohibited by statutefrom covering preventive services, it must draw a distinctionbetween treatment and prevention. The kind of information insurersrequire to cover these services includes necessary frequency oftreatment, types of providers best suited to provide treatment, anironclad case that the intervention is effective, a consensus inthe professional community around the intervention, and an abilityto guard against the potential for fraud and abuse.Pollock added the notion that demonstrations of effectiveness inprimary care settings, in the eyes of policymakers and payers, arenot tantamount to demonstrating cost-effectiveness in emergencydepartments, underscoring the importance of research in thatsetting.Gordon agreed.Recommendation #4 Research is needed to evaluate the effects oflegal, privacy, confidentiality, regulatory, and human subjectsissues on screening and interventions for alcohol problems among EDpatients.Brown praised the recommendation for addressing a very importantissue. However, he thought the human subjects aspect might notbelong, because human subjects issues will not affect screening andintervention on a daily basis in the clinical setting. They onlyaffect research studies.Bombardier suggested that in addition to evaluation, thisresearch should develop ways to mitigate legal, privacy, andconfidentiality problems associated with screening andtreatment.Ann Mahoney said the recommendation should be worded to focus onsystems as well as individuals. For example, she indicated that theconcerns institutional and professional systems have aboutreimbursement or legal, privacy, and confidentiality issuesinfluence whether ED patients receive screening andinterventions.Hargarten commented that this area has the potential to causeconsternation and divisiveness, so it will require a great deal oftextual commentary to tease out the important issues that itaddresses. He noted that alcohol screening in the ED is currentlybeing discussed on the "ethics circuit." He suggested that perhapsethics should be added to the recommendation.Recommendation #5 Research is needed on how demographic andcultural attributes of ED patients, practitioners, andinterventionists influence the success of screening andinterventions for alcohol problems.Hargarten said there should be some reference in therecommendations to the high-risk environment in which these peoplelive and work and visit the ED. He wondered if this recommendationwas the appropriate place.Marilyn Sommers noted that different clinical settings canprofoundly influence how screening and intervention is delivered.She cited differences between Level I trauma centers and communityhospitals. She suggested that the influence of setting be madeexplicit somewhere in the recommendations.Alison Moore indicated that these differences can also influencehow researchers and clinicians tailor interventions to apply topeople with different cultural attributes.Li suggested that co-morbidity or patients' medicalcharacteristics could also have a large impact on the success ofinterventions.Recommendation #6 Research is needed to identify the factorsthat foster the organizational and practitioner behavior changesneeded to institutionalize screening and intervention for alcoholproblems among ED patients.Walker urged that this research not be confined to academicmedical centers, but be designed and carried out in partnershipswith other stakeholders, particularly community-level providers.She believed that this should be in the recommendation, not justsupporting text, because reviewers would want to know how screeningand intervention can be implemented into clinical practice whenconsidering grant applications.Robert Lowe suggested a range of research topics could comeunder this recommendation. Who should do interventions in the ED?How should ED interventions be linked to the primary care andpublic health systems? Which services should be provided in the EDand which should be provided elsewhere? How can referrals beeffectively accomplished? How can interventions be paid for? Hesuggested wording for the supporting text for this recommendation."Research in this category may address a broad range oforganizational issues-from the structure of alcohol and screeningtreatment services within the ED to the relationship of the ED toother sources of primary care and the organizational and fiscalfactors affecting that relationship. This research is crucial asthe field progresses from evaluating efficacy in research settingsto examining effectiveness in the current, complex health caredelivery system."Babor supported Lowe's revision and suggested adding the word"implementation" to the recommendation. Research is needed on howto implement and institutionalize these programs. Factors to beexplored range from practitioner behavior and practice guidelinesto policy changes that are needed to facilitate implementation ofscreening and intervention in these settings. If thisrecommendation is too narrowly defined, we will encourage people tolook at small things like training programs. However, no matter howstrong a training program is, if there are no incentives forpractitioners to use the training or the legal restrictions areinsurmountable or the health care system is in total chaos and youcannot find who is in charge of the department because somebody hasbought out the hospital, you will have difficulty implementing anintervention.Peter Rostenberg noted that most trauma care is delivered incommunity hospitals, and practitioners in that setting often do notrelate to Level I trauma care research. Therefore, he supportedincluding community hospitals in research efforts. He thought thebiggest barrier was how to change the culture in the ED so thatstaff would ask screening questions.Ries thought that the recommendations should encourage studyingoutcomes that are important to medical personnel, such as healthcare outcomes and recidivism, rather than alcohol use outcomes.Hargarten related that a recent survey found that almostone-third of academic EDs have faculty in community settings. Hethought that encouraging this linkage in research proposals couldhelp increase this proportion. He also suggested that involvingopinion leaders in the field of emergency medicine could helpreduce the lag time between academic research showing theeffectiveness of an intervention and broad implementation innon-academic, clinical settings.Patricia Perry believed that the recommendation was not yetcomprehensive. Hospital administrators merit mention because theyare key to wide implementation. She thought state and federalpolicymakers should also be included in the statement. She observedthat institutionalizing new practices was just the beginning of thetask. Once they are in place, the program needs to be maintained.She wondered what factors influenced maintenance.Pat Lenaghan suggested that clinicians need recommendationsabout what could be accomplished now. They need to know thatscreening works and that the sooner screening is implemented thesooner patients with alcohol problems can receive help. She notedthat collaboration with community groups and public health agenciesis appropriate for alcohol problems because they are not justpresent in the ED. She said that such collaboration has contributedto the success of domestic violence screening across thecountry.Bombardier noted that barriers exist among departments withininstitutions as well as among institutions. He advocated developinginformation systems that follow patients so that data collected inthe ED can be used later.Ronald Maio suggested defining the unique role of the emergencydepartment in the overall picture of treating alcohol problems.What can the emergency department do that cannot be done in othersettings?Soderstrom suggested that the term "practitioner" in thisrecommendation needs to be clarified because it can mean anyone whotakes care of a patient, including RNs, MDs, therapists, andothers.Bernstein noted that alcohol-dependent patients clearly needspecialized treatment and that some patients with hazardousdrinking need out-patient counseling. He said if access to thatcounseling is not available, screening and interventions are lesslikely to happen in the ED. He called for research on barriersemergency physicians face in getting further care for ED patientswith alcohol problems.Hargarten wondered about supporting text that calls forpolicy-relevant research to institutionalize and to promoteorganizational changes. He suggested that research on ways ofpaying for these services could be an important factor in promotingand institutionalizing changes.Recommendation #7 Research is needed to explore and define therole of information technology in facilitating screening andintervention for alcohol problems among ED patients.Brown asked whether other forms of technology should beincluded, such as audio tape headsets.Janet Williams suggested the phrase "information andcommunication technology." She said that these technologies canassist in follow-up and continuity of care.Ries commented that educational videos in waiting rooms can behelpful.Hargarten added that tele-medicine has a role in making thebooster intervention a reality.Recommendation #8 Funding agencies should support research onscreening and interventions for alcohol problems among ED patientsand make the mechanisms of research supportknown to potentialapplicants in emergency medicine.Longabaugh wanted the recommendation to include researchtraining as an explicit component. He said that it has beendifficult to get good, physician applicants for Brown'spost-doctoral program in intervention and treatment research.However, the program has produced a great deal of research.Mechanisms to facilitate the training of good researchers,particularly ones from emergency medicine, are needed and should beencouraged.Hargarten added that training mechanisms should not be limitedto physicians. He suggested including nurses and PhDs.Diesenhaus noted that agencies are required to fund differenttypes of research. SAMHSA funds applied research, and theirapplication pro-gram is oversubscribed.Brown felt that the recommendation placed too muchresponsibility on funding agencies. He suggested the recommendationencourage the emergency medicine academic organization to help itsmembers find other funding opportunities. He thought there weremany opportunities through other organizations that should betapped.Gentilello said he has long supported placing a priority onresearch in this area. However, funding agencies cannot be forcedto accept this. He agreed with Brown that professional societiesshould be clear about funding opportunities. At the same time, thedata indicate many missed opportunities for treatment in the ED.For some patients, the ED visit is the only contact with themedical care system. It can be their only opportunity forintervention, and injuries are the most common events that bringpeople into contact with the emergency department. We can present astrong case that work in the ED should be a high priority.Pollock suggested that ED visits are crucial opportunities, andthe supporting text for this recommendation can make that clear. Itis possible to emphasize this topic without stating that it shouldtake precedence over other issues or have a certain amount ofresources devoted to it.Hungerford thought that work in the ED needed a higher priorityand more resources if the field is to move forward.Pollock asked for a more specific definition of"prioritization." It is unfortunate, but in the eyes of funders, itis perceived as a zero sum game.Bernstein suggested that the supporting text for thisrecommendation would have to explain the need for politicalcommitment to changing the health and social outcomes resultingfrom alcohol problems.Hargarten suggested that we do not have to ask federal agenciesto make research on alcohol problems in the ED a high priority.Instead, we could recommend that, compared with other settings, theprevalence of alcohol problems among ED patients makes it worthy ofcareful consideration. We can also recommend that research effortsshould include an ED focus and that emergency medicine expertsshould be included in the grant review process. This strategy wouldattempt to broaden the focus of current research activities toinclude the ED.Longabaugh commented that an NIAAA effort to conduct research onspirituality and addiction came about by setting aside fundsspecifically for this topic. He said the way to accomplish this isto find and work with agency staff interested in the topic. Hebelieved that data on the prevalence and severity of alcoholproblems in EDs can have a major impact.Ries agreed and suggested that this recommendation shouldpromote ED-based research by emphasizing the large number of EDpatients affected by alcohol problems and the significant healthcare impact of those problems.Fiellin suggested the recommendation should ask for a level ofsupport that is commensurate with the burden of illness.Gentilello pointed out that the literature includes 40randomized trials on brief interventions in family and generalpractice settings. Three (one in press) are in emergency medicine.The emergency department at Harborview probably sees 50 times asmany patients with alcohol problems as the psychiatry or familymedicine departments. If we were to choose one place to set up ascreening system to find people who need interventions, it shouldbe the emergency department. He said there needs to be a shift inpriorities.Mary Dufour described how NIAAA sets research priorities. Tosecure some funding for this conference, she had to "compete" withother conferences, which indicates that this issue is high on theNIAAA list of priorities. NIAAA has a National Advisory Councilwith a subcommittee that helps to set research priorities.Interacting with the Council is an important way to influenceresearch priorities, she said. Every three to five years, NIAAAreviews its whole research portfolio; it identifies gaps, whichbecome research priorities. Alcohol and injury, as well as briefinterventions, are on the list. NIAAA is a small institution withmore priorities than money.Brown suggested that the recommendation remain as is, but thatthe supporting text list ways that priorities could be changed.Because drug use is also an important issue among ED patients, hethought combining alcohol and drug research in EDs could lead tomore research dollars. He noted a growing understanding of theimportance of screening for alcohol and other drugs together. Toappeal to NIDA, he said, the referral aspect of the research shouldbe strong because of their focus on treatment.Diesenhaus agreed that both support from staff in an agency andthe "burden of illness" argument could be influential. He said thatdemand for research in EDs from outside an agency would also beimportant. He suggested that conference participants needed tointeract with individuals and groups that influence policy.Gentilello acknowledged that there is a demand problem. The goalis to help trauma surgeons and emergency physicians realize thatdealing with alcohol problems is an integral part of their job.Research on alcohol problems is as important as research on sepsisand CPR. At the NIH web site, he found no information onalcohol-related research in the surgery section. It was all in thealcohol section, which surgeons do not explore. If we want surgeonsto become interested, it should be repeated in the surgerysection.Longabaugh remarked that NIH is increasingly trying toindividualize the routing of grant applications so that studysection members are a matter of public record. If a study sectiondoes not include a relevant expert, then a cover letter with thegrant application can request such an expert.Li suggested that adding a reference to the Healthy People 2010objective to reduce alcohol-related injury and ED visits by 15%might enhance the rationale for more research.General comments about the recommendationsAfter participants had given extensive feedback on specificproposed recommendations, Hungerford asked if they had generalcomments about the recommendations overall.Fiellin reflected on increasing information about the biologicalbasis for addictive disorders, the increasing effectiveness ofpharmacotherapy, and the fact that we are trying look at thesedisorders the same way we look at chronic medical conditions likehypertension and diabetes. He asked whether we might initiatepharmocotherapy for patients with alcohol-related problems in theED, much like we initiate use of oral hypoglycemics andanti-hypertensives with some type of follow-up.