Current Federal Frequent Traveler PolicyUnder current federal laws and regulations, the frequenttraveler benefits1 received by a federal employee in conjunctionwith official travel are generally considered government property,and the employee may not retain the benefits for personal use. As aresult, the employee should accept the benefits on behalf of thegovernment and turn them over to the employee's agency. The agencyshould then integrate the benefits into its travel plans tomaximize their value to the government.Initially, this policy was enunciated and followed in a numberof prior Comptroller General decisions. These decisions were basedon the fundamental rule of law that a federal employee is obligatedto account for any gift, gratuity, or benefit received from privatesources incident to the performance of official duty. Any suchgifts, gratuities, or benefits tendered to the employee are viewedas having been received on behalf of the government.2In 1994, Congress enacted a statute designed to help realize tothe maximum extent practicable cost savings for official travelfrom frequent traveler benefits. The statute directed theAdministrator of GSA to issue guidelines to ensure that agenciespromote, encourage, and facilitate the use of frequent travelerprograms offered by airlines, hotels, and car rental vendors byfederal employees who engage in official travel.3 This actspecifically provides that any awards granted under such a frequenttraveler program accrued through official travel shall be used onlyfor official travel.4GSA has incorporated these policies into the Federal PropertyManagement Regulations5 and the Federal Travel Regulation,6applicable to most federal civilian employees. Similarly, the JointFederal Travel Regulations,7 applicable to members of1These include the benefits offered by airlines, hotels, and carrental vendors.2See 67 Comp. Gen. 79 (1987) (quoting B-199656, July 15, 1981);and 63 Comp. Gen. 229 (1984). See also, 63 Comp. Gen. 233 (1984);B-215826, Jan. 23, 1986; and B-257525, Nov. 30, 1994.3Federal Acquisition Streamlining Act of 1994, P.L. 103-355, 6008, 102 Stat. 3367 (1994), 5 U.S.C.  5702, note.4P.L. 103-355,  6008(b). GSA issued Bulletin FTR 17, Oct. 24,1995, advising agencies of the provisions of P.L. No. 103-355, 6008 and reminding them of the existing provisions of the FederalTravel Regulation concerning cost-saving opportunities provided bythe use of frequent traveler benefits. In Bulletin FTR 17, GSA alsoencouraged agencies to establish programs under the GovernmentEmployees Incentive Awards Act, 5 U.S.C.  4501-4507, to rewardemployees who take the initiative to accrue travel savings, and GSAoffered its program as a guide in establishing such rewardprograms.541 C.F.R.  101-25.103-2.641 C.F.R. part 301-53.7Paragraph U2010B.the uniformed services, recognize that promotional materialreceived by a uniformed service member traveling on officialbusiness at government expense belongs to the government and mustbe relinquished in accordance with service regulations.8Legislation would be required to change the government's generalpolicy to allow civilian employees and uniformed service members toretain for personal use frequent traveler benefits accrued onofficial travel. Such legislation would be necessary to repeal thecurrent requirement that such benefits be used only for officialtravel9 and to affirmatively authorize employees and members toretain for personal use these benefits that are now considered theproperty of the government.Use of Frequent Flyer Miles for Official Travel Is Difficultand Appears LimitedComprehensive governmentwide data are not readily available onthe extent to which federal agencies capture and use frequent flyermiles for official travel. GSA officials told us that they do notcollect such data. However, our task team did obtain information onGAO's practices, as well as those of several other federalorganizations. This information follows.GAO's ExperienceGAO has never had a centralized, formal program to reduce itstravel costs by capturing and using its employees' official travelmiles. Several years ago, we pilottested a program in one of ourheadquarters units but soon discontinued it for a variety ofreasons. These reasons, which have also discouraged otherheadquarters units, include the airlines' refusal to establishseparate official and personal travel accounts for employees,employees' reluctance to participate, administrative burdens andcosts, and limited savings. Furthermore, few frequent flyer seatswere available at desired travel times, transfers of free ticketsto other employees took time and effort, and employees who flew ondifferent airlines often took a long time to accumulate enoughmiles for free trips.Although we never set up a GAO-wide program to capture and usefrequent flyer miles, several of our field offices tried toestablish such programs. Of these, the majority discontinued theirefforts for the same reasons that discouraged our headquartersunits. Two field offices did, however, establish programs andcontinue to operate them, yet their dollar savings have been verylimited. One office saved $6,600 over about 33 months. This officehas many employees with enough miles on single carriers for freetrips, but these miles have been difficult to use because few seatshave been available when employees have needed to travel.Furthermore, in past years, the unit's savings were reduced by the$50 fee that the contract carrier charged for reservations madeless than 3 weeks in advance. Accumulating sufficient8There are some federal organizations that are not covered by 6008 of P.L. 103-355 and also have their own property disposalauthority. One such organization we are aware of that does notprohibit its employees from retaining frequent flyer benefits fortheir personal use is the U.S. Postal Service.9 6008 of P.L. 103-355.frequent flyer miles for this unit's employees has become moreproblematic since the government contracted with a differentcarrier for one of the unit's most heavily traveled routes. Theother field office, which reported saving about $32,000 over 6years, also noted that multiple changes in contract carriers havemade it more difficult to accumulate and effectively use frequentflyer miles.Experiences of Other Federal OrganizationsThe other federal organizations we contacted had variedapproaches to capturing and using frequent flyer benefits forofficial travel. A representative from one--the U.S. PostalService, which is not subject to the travel rules that apply tomost federal agencies--said that the Service does not prohibit itsemployees from making personal use of the frequent flyer milesreceived on official travel.In 1998, the Department of the Interior considered establishinga frequent traveler program that would have been managed by acontractor. However, the Department rejected the contractor'sproposal as too expensive and difficult to implement. Interiorbelieved that the fees the contractor would have charged wereexcessive and the savings were uncertain. In addition, under thecontractor's proposal, Interior would have had to provide thecontractor with data on the frequent flyer miles received by itsemployees. It would have had to obtain the data from the employeesbecause the airlines would not provide the information to theagency.An Interior Department representative told us that some of itsbureaus use frequent flyer benefits to enable their employees totake training and attend conferences because their budgets do notcover non-program-related travel. Therefore, if frequent flyermiles received on program-related travel were not captured and usedfor this type of travel, the bureaus might not be able to sendtheir employees to these types of events. At the same time, ifemployees were allowed to retain the frequent flyer benefits, theymight be willing to use some of their miles for such travel on avoluntary basis.GSA, IRS, and the Department of Justice have establishedgain-sharing programs that enable frequent travelers to share inthe savings they achieve in airfares, lodging costs, or both. Underthese programs, employees can obtain cash awards based on savingsthey can document by using free tickets from airline frequent flyerprograms or by securing lodging rates below the maximum amountsallowed.According to GSA officials, GSA considered establishing afrequent traveler program in the early 1990s but abandoned the ideabecause the airlines would neither pool the miles received by GSAemployees for the agency's use nor provide data to GSA on the milesits employees received. In 1995, however, GSA established avoluntary gainsharing program under which employees who use freetickets awarded for official travel miles or secure lodging at lessthan the established lodging rates can receive cash awards of up tohalf the amount saved for the government. GSA reported that fromJanuary 1995 through September 2000, almost $823,000 was savedunder the program, and employees received about half that amount incash awards. These savings do not take into account the costs ofadministering the gain-sharing program, which GSA officials believewere minimal. However, GSA officials view the program as a limitedsuccess because the savings are low relative to GSA's overalltravel costs, which totaled about $190 million for the last 6years. In addition, GSA officials believe that most of the savingsare from the lodging portion of the program rather than from theuse of frequent flyer miles.IRS established a program similar to GSA's in 2000 at therequest of the National Treasury Employees Union. Employees canaccrue savings by such means as using frequent flyer miles toobtain free airline tickets, sharing hotel rooms with coworkers, orstaying with friends or relatives. IRS travel officials did nothave data on the savings achieved through their program because theprogram is less than a year old. However, they view the program asa success. They said employees like the program and most of thesavings are in lodging costs.The Justice Department established its gain-sharing program atthe beginning of fiscal year 1996. Like GSA and IRS, Justice sharessavings its employees achieve by using frequent flyer miles andobtaining lodging at reduced costs. The program is discretionary,and Justice components can choose whether they want to includefrequent flyer savings, lodging savings, or both. Administrativesupport staff who assist travelers who achieve savings can alsoshare in the savings awards. According to Justice, it saved about$70,000 in fiscal year 1996 and $202,000 in fiscal year 1997 andpaid cash awards equaling about half of the savings. Again, thesefinancial benefits do not factor in the gain-sharing program'sadministrative costs. Justice did not provide savings data beyondfiscal year 1997.According to a representative from DOD, the Department does nothave a departmentwide frequent traveler program and has no data onthe extent to which its components have such programs. He said thatin the mid-1990s, his command attempted to, but could not, find aneffective program for capturing and using employees' officialfrequent flyer miles anywhere in DOD. He believes the use of freetickets awarded for frequent flyer miles in DOD is spotty at best.He cited many of the same practical difficulties with implementingthe current federal policy that we and other agencies identified,including the reluctance of both the airlines and employees toprovide frequent flyer data to the government and the problems withtracking and using miles for official travel. He also identifiedanother difficulty--the time and expense associated with takingdisciplinary action against employees who violate the currentpolicy by making personal use of miles received on official travel.He said his agency completed a demotion action against an employeefor personal use of miles, but assistance from the airlines wasdifficult to obtain. Such action, he maintained, was notcost-effective. These difficulties, combined with a departmentalemphasis on adopting private-sector practices, have led DOD toprepare draft legislation that would abolish the currentrestriction and allow military and civilian employeesgovernmentwide to retain for personal use frequent flyer benefitsreceived on official travel. He said that DOD has discussed itsproposal with other federal agencies, which have been supportive.DOD is currently considering submitting its proposal to the Officeof Management and Budget.An SEC representative informed us that SEC began using acontractor's software 2 to 3 years ago to facilitate the use offrequent flyer mileage. She said that employees' participation inSEC's frequent flyer program is voluntary and that SEC's savingshave been minimal, in part because frequent flyer tickets do notgive travelers flexibility in arranging their travel. Specifically,she said that it is difficult for SEC employees to obtain seatingusing frequent flyer tickets because many trips are scheduled,canceled, or changed at the last minute. Finally, she said that SECis likely to discontinue its contract because the savings, minusthe contractor's 30-percent commission, are not sufficient tooffset SEC's "hidden" management and oversight costs and employeeshave not been enthusiastic about participating in the program.The Private Sector's PracticesAccording to the results of three recent surveys, the privatesector commonly allows its employees to retain for personal usefrequent flyer miles received on business travel. This practice maygive the private sector, including government contractors, anadvantage over the federal government in recruiting and retainingemployees. While small compared with the higher salaries companiesoften pay, this advantage may nonetheless influence the job choicesof some employees, especially if they are frequent travelers.In April 2001, the National Business Travel Association surveyedits members via the Internet on frequent traveler programs.According to the Association, 200 companies responded. Of these, 98percent said they do not recover frequent traveler benefitsreceived by employees on business travel for their companies, and95 percent said they have no plans to do so. According to theAssociation, most companies do not want to become involved incapturing these benefits because it is too difficult to track milesor points received.In May 2000, the Bureau of National Affairs reported the resultsof a 1999 survey of about 1,800 companies on their business travelpolicies. These companies, about 450 of which responded to thesurvey, represented a cross section of U.S. employers: 34 percentwere manufacturing companies, 36 percent were nonmanufacturing(e.g., service) businesses, and about 30 percent were otherestablishments, such as health care facilities, educationalinstitutions, and government agencies. Seventy percent of thecompanies had fewer than 1,000 employees, and the remainder hadmore. According to the survey, most employers with businesstravelers allowed their workers to keep frequent flyer milesreceived on business travel for their own use. About two-thirds ofthe responding companies reported specifically allowing theiremployees to retain the miles for their personal use, about 20percent reported having no policy at all, and under 10 percentreported requiring their employees to relinquish mileage receivedto the company. A few companies reported having gain-sharingprograms similar to GSA's, IRS', and Justice's.The findings from these two surveys appear consistent with theresults of an American Express survey of business travelmanagement, reported in July 1999 by Business Travel News, abusiness travel industry publication. According to the articlediscussing this survey, the trend in the private sector was awayfrom collecting frequent flyer awards, and the number ofcorporations doing so was declining. Specifically, the surveyshowed that the proportion of companies managing and using frequentflyer miles received by their travelers fell from 9 percent in 1994to 4 percent in 1996. According to the article, "most companiesneither want the headache of tracking miles nor the disincentivethat taking them away might present to employees." In addition, thearticle discussed the views of the travel services manager of acompany that was using a contractor to aggressively track and usefrequent flyer miles for company business. Although this approachwas saving the company 10 percent of its overall air travel costs,the manager said he would rather receive discounts from theairlines than deal with frequent flyer miles.These survey results are also consistent with the experience ofone large corporation that we contacted in 1994 after learning thatit had established a program to capture and use for company travelfrequent flyer miles received by employees on company business. Thecompany later told us that it had discontinued the program becauseof its adverse effect on employee morale. In April 2001, wecontacted the company again, and a representative told us that thecompany continues to allow its employees to make personal use offrequent flyer miles received on company travel.Views on Frequent Flyer IssueYou asked for our views on this issue as well as those of theForeign Service Officers Association. I will discuss theAssociation's views first.In April 2001, the Director of Congressional Affairs for theForeign Service Officers Association told us that the Associationwould support legislation that would allow federal employees tokeep for personal use frequent flyer miles earned on officialtravel. He said the Association recognizes that many foreignservice officers frequently travel long distances and wouldtherefore receive considerable benefits from such legislation.However, he noted that these officers are often assigned tohardship locations that require difficult travel. He also said thatif this type of legislation is not feasible, the Association'smembers would like to be able to use their frequent flyer miles toupgrade to business class on long flights.In our view, the current federal policy on frequent flyer mileswas well intentioned as a potential means for reducing federaltravel costs and promoting economy in government. We recognize thatfederal agencies, including GAO, might be able to achieve someadditional savings by taking more advantage of frequent flyer milesfor government travel. However, the practical obstacles toachieving significantly greater savings are such that few agencieshave overcome them without creating incentives, such asgain-sharing plans, that have generally reduced the government'ssavings by half. Additionally, more aggressive efforts to usefrequent flyer miles to reduce the government's travel costs could,according to GSA, jeopardize its ability to negotiate significantsavings under its contract air carrier program. This negotiatedtravel program saves the government over $2 billion annually. GSAofficials responsible for the program told us they believe thesavings achieved through this program far outweigh the benefits thegovernment would gain through more aggressive efforts to captureand use frequent flyer miles for official travel. We do not knowhow a change in the current federal policy to permit individual usewould affect GSA's ability to negotiate savings in contractairfares. However, a change would not seem likely to have anegative impact, since, in contrast to the current policy, it wouldbe consistent with the airlines' position that frequent flyer milesbelong to the individual traveler.Changing the federal policy on frequent flyer miles would havesome disadvantages for the government. First, it would eliminateany savings that certain agencies currently achieve by implementingthe policy. In addition, some employees who now travel on freetickets obtained with frequent flyer miles might no longer be ableto travel when funds for air travel were not available or were inshort supply. However, these disadvantages would, we believe, befar outweighed by the advantages of a change, both to federalemployees and to the government. A change would eliminate thecurrent disparity in practice between the private sector and thegovernment and would put federal employees on a par with theirprivate-sector counterparts, including federal contractorpersonnel, in this area. Like private-sector employees, federalemployees who put up with flight delays and cancellations andtravel on their own time to meet work schedules would then feelthat they were being compensated, in part, for these frustrationsand sacrifices. Establishing parity between the federal governmentand the private sector in this area would also aid the governmentin recruiting and retaining top-quality employees.If the current policy is changed to allow federal civilian andmilitary employees to retain their official travel miles forpersonal use, controls over the need for travel and the selectionof routes and carriers would have to be effectively implemented.These controls are designed to prevent employees from selectingcertain carriers to earn miles or otherwise undercutting thegovernment's negotiated fare agreements with major carriers.Today, millions of frequent flyer miles earned on officialtravel are going unused, benefiting neither the government nor itsemployees. Changing the federal frequent flyer policy-and changingit retroactively so that employees can take advantage of theseunused miles--would boost federal employees' morale and strengthenthe federal government's ability to compete with the privatesector. We therefore believe Congress should consider allowingfederal employees to keep and make personal use of the frequentflyer miles they have already received and will receive forofficial travel. In order to assist the Committee, we have encloseddraft legislation that would accomplish this objective (see enc.I).If you have any questions on the information we are providing orif we can be of further assistance, please call me on (202)512-5500 or John H. Anderson, Jr., Managing Director, PhysicalInfrastructure Issues, on (202) 512-2834.Sincerely yours,David M. Walker Comptroller General Of the United StatesEnclosure IDraft LegislationBe it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of theUnited States in Congress assembled,SEC. 1. Section 5702 of title 5, United States Code, is amended-(1)by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (d);and(2)by inserting after subsection (b) the following newsubsection (c): "(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection(d), promotional items an employee (including a justice or judge)receives as a consequence of using travel or transportationservices procured by the United States or accepted pursuant to31U.S.C.  1353 may be retained by the employee for personal use.Promotional items include only those obtained under the same termsas those offered to the general public and at no additional cost tothe government. Promotional items include but are not limited tofrequent flyer miles, upgrades, and access to carrier clubs orfacilities."SEC. 2. Section 404 of title 37, United States Code, is amended-(1)by redesignating subsection (j) as subsection (k);and(2)by inserting after subsection (i) the following newsubsection:"(j) Promotional items a member receives as a consequence ofusing travel or transportation services procured by the UnitedStates or accepted pursuant to 31U.S.C.  1353 may be retained by the member for personal use.Promotional items include only those obtained under the same termsas those offered to the general public and at no additional cost tothe government. Promotional items include but are not limited tofrequent flyer miles, upgrades, and access to carrier clubs orfacilities."SEC. 3. Section 6008 of the Federal Acquisition Streamlining Actof 1994, Public Law 103-355 (5 U.S.C.  5702, note), isrepealed.SEC. 4. Sections 1 and 2 of this act shall apply to promotionalitems received prior to the effective date of this act.Sectional AnalysisSection 1 of this legislation would amend section 5702 of title5, United States Code (Per diem, employees traveling on officialbusiness). This amendment would authorize federal civilianemployees, including justices and judges, who receive promotionalitems incident to using government procured travel ortransportation services, or such services accepted from non-Federalsources pursuant to 31 U.S.C.  1353, to retain such promotionalitems for personal use. The travel or transportation services fromwhich the promotional benefits accrue are intended to includeservices provided by airlines, hotels, and rental car vendors. TheAdministrator of the General Services Administration would beexpected to prescribe regulations under existing authority in 5U.S.C.  5707 to protect the government from incurring excess costsorimproper selection of travel or transportation providers for thebenefit of the employee. Enclosure ISection 2 of this legislation would amend section 404 of title37, United States Code (Travel and Transportation Allowances). Thisamendment would provide the same treatment for members of theuniformed services. The Secretaries of the services concerned underexisting authority in 37 U.S.C.  404 would be expected toprescribe regulations similar to those prescribed by theAdministrator of General Services.Section 3 of the legislation would repeal section 6008 of theFederal Acquisition Streamlining Act of 1994, Pub. L. 103-355, 108.Stat. 3367 (1994) (5 U.S.C.  5702 note). Section 6008 requires theAdministrator of the General Services Administration to issueguidelines to ensure that agencies promote, encourage, andfacilitate the use of frequent traveler programs offered byairlines, hotels, and car rental vendors by Federal employees whoengage in official travel, for the purpose of realizing costsavings for official travel. Section 6008 also provides that anyawards granted under such a frequent traveler program accruedthrough official travel shall be used only for official travel. Itwould be necessary to repeal section 6008 since its provisionsconflict with the purposes of sections 1 and 2 of the proposedlegislation.Section 4 would make it clear that the legislation is applicableto any unused promotional benefits received by an employee orservice member prior to the effective date of the legislation aswell as to such benefits received on and after the effective dateof the legislation.