I. The President's Approach - Building on SuccessThe President's Energy Plan includes a number of conservation,advanced research and development, and other efforts that willreduce electricity usage. Reducing the amount of electricity we useand the amount of fuel needed to produce it are part of the answersto the challenge of providing energy in an environmentallyresponsible way.The President's Energy Plan goes even further. The President hasdirected me to develop proposed legislation that wouldsignificantly reduce and cap NOx, SO2 and mercury emissions frompower generation. Such a program (with appropriate measures toaddress local concerns) would provide significant health benefitseven as we increase electricity supplies. The proposed legislationwill:-establish reduction targets for emissions of SO2, NOx andmercury,-phase in reductions over a reasonable time period,similar to the successful Acid Rain Program established by the 1990amendments to the Clean Air Act and to state programs,-provide regulatory certainty to allow utilities to makemodifications to their plants without fear of new litigation,and-provide market-based incentives, such as emissionstrading, to help achieve the required reductions.Nationwide reductions of the three emissions, SO2, NOx andmercury, in an integrated approach would result in key benefitsincluding thousands of avoided premature deaths and aggravation ofrespiratory and cardiovascular illness due to fine particles,reduced hospitalization and emergency room visits due to fineparticles and continued exposure to ground-level ozone. It wouldalso address interstate transport issues as they relate to meetingthe new particulate matter and ozone air quality standards.Visibility improvement would be anticipated over large areasincluding national parks and wilderness areas and recovery of manyfreshwater and coastal ecosystems would be likely. Public healthrisks associated with mercury, particularly those posed to childrenand women of child bearing age, may be reduced. This includes risksof neurotoxic effects such as mental retardation, cerebral palsy,difficulty speaking and hearing others, and other learningdisabilities. Currently, current forty plus states have fishadvisories; that number would be reduced.The President's approach builds on the Acid Rain Program, whichprovides a wonderful model for future programs. It has not only metexpectations, but exceeded them. Administering the Acid RainProgram has been a cost-effective experience. The program willachieve about 40% of the total emission reductions required underthe 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments at a low cost to industry and tothe government. The program is administered with a relatively smallstaff relying on strong and state-of-the-art data tracking andreporting capabilities.When President George H.W. Bush signed the Clean Air ActAmendments of 1990, it revolutionized clean air policy regardingregional and national air pollution issues and drove environmentalprotection in new directions. First, the President and Congressdesigned the Acid Rain Program to focus on reducing the SO2emissions that cause acid deposition and translated the emissionreduction goal into a nationwide cap on emissions from electricgenerating sources. Second, Congress provided EPA with a tool toachieve this reduction - - an innovative market-based allowancetrading program. This "cap and trade" approach provided greatercertainty that the emissions reductions would be achieved andsustained while at the same time allowing industry unprecedentedflexibility in how to achieve the needed emission reductions. Inreturn for this flexibility, sources were to provide a fullaccounting of their emissions through continuous monitoring andreporting, and there would be consequences for failing to comply.The objective was for sources to find the most cost-effective meansfor limiting SO2 emissions and to be responsible for achievingthose emission reductions. There would be no government secondguessing and lengthy permit reviews.Compliance with the Acid Rain Program began in 1995 and is nowin its seventh year. It has been a resounding success, with SO2emissions from power generation dropping 4.5 million tons from 1990levels and NOx emissions down 1.5 million tons from 1990 levels(about 3 million tons lower than projected growth). In addition,during the first Phase of the program (1995-1999), SO2 emissionswere between 20 to 30 percent below their allowable levels.Furthermore, environmental monitoring networks tracked importantenvironmental improvements - - acid deposition was reduced by up to30 percent in certain areas of the country.And, these environmental improvements cost less than predictedbecause of the built-in market based incentives. In 1990, EPAprojected the cost of full implementation of the SO2 emissionsreduction with trading at $5.7 billion per year (1997 dollars). In1994, GAO projected the cost at $2.3 billion per year (1997dollars). Recent estimates of annualized cost of compliance are inthe range of $1 to $1.5 billion per year at fullimplementation.President Bush has not only promised to take the SO2 tradingprogram to the next level but he has experience to lend to thematter. In 1999, then-Governor Bush signed legislation thatpermanently caps NOx and SO2 emissions from older power plants inTexas starting in 2003 and requires utilities to install a certainquantity of renewable and clean energy capacity by 2009.Environmental Defense hailed this legislation as a model for thecountry. The Emission Banking and Trading of Allowances Program isexpected to achieve substantial reductions when it is fully phasedin by 2003. It is estimated that this program will reduce NOx by75,000 tons per year and SO2 by 35,000 tons per year. It isdesigned to give the utilities flexibility in determining how andwhere to achieve the reductions. Allowances are allocated to eachpower plant based on 1997 emissions using a formula that does notpenalize the "clean" plants that already have a low NOx or SO2emission rate. Permitted power generating plants may opt into thetrading program.II. Regulating Emissions from Power GenerationThe President's legislative approach stands in sharp contrast tothe complex web of existing regulations which currently confrontthe industry. Over the years, Congress, EPA and the States haveresponded to specific environmental and public health problems bydeveloping separate regulatory programs for utilities to addressthe specific problems. Each individual program uses its ownapproach to serve its own purpose. As I describe the differentregulatory programs, I think you will understand why we believe itis time to simplify. If we have a new legislation thatsignificantly reduces emissions of SO2, NOx and mercury, we caneliminate many of the individual programs that apply to the powergeneration sector and replace them with a system that will reducethe administrative burden on industry and governments, usemarket-based incentives to keep compliance costs low, and providethe industry with more certainty about its future regulatoryobligations.There are many regulatory initiatives in place that will lead toreductions in air emissions from electric power generation. Theseregulations include both federal and State requirements thataddress a variety of emissions including SO2, NOx, CO, PM10, and anumber of hazardous air pollutants. The requirements also varydepending on the characteristics of the generating facility,including its boiler type, size, age and location. These programsinclude the National Ambient Air Quality Standards for particulatematter and ozone, the section 126 and the NOx SIP Call rules, newsource review and new source performance standards, the regionalhaze rule and mercury regulation as a hazardous air pollutant,among others.EPA has set national ambient air quality standards (NAAQS) forsix pollutants: ozone, carbon monoxide (CO); particulate matter(PM); SO2; NO2; and lead (Pb). The Clean Air Act calls upon Statesto adopt emissions control requirements in the form of StateImplementation Plans ("SIPs") to bring nonattainment areas intocompliance with the NAAQS. Historically, most States' strategies toattain the SO2 and PM NAAQS included power plant controls.EPA has taken two actions to address the contribution ofinterstate transport of NOx emissions to downwind ozonenonattainment problems, and both of these actions affect the powersector. In 1998, EPA finalized the NOx SIP call, which now requires19 states and the District of Columbia (whose emissionssignificantly contribute to downwind ozone nonattainment problems)to revise their SIPs to control summertime NOx emissions. Inresponse, all of these States are choosing control strategies thatfocus on reducing power plant emissions. In a separate action aimedat the same interstate NOx transport problem, in January 2000, EPAfinalized a rule which was issued in response to petitions fromseveral northeastern states under section 126 of the CAA. In thisrule, EPA found that emissions from large electric generating unitsand large industrial boilers and turbines in 12 States and theDistrict of Columbia are significantly contributing to downwindstates' ozone nonattainment problems. The rule requires thesesources to control their summertime NOx emissions under the FederalNOx Budget Trading Program beginning May 1, 2003.The electric power generation sector is also regulated through avariety of traditional and innovative programs. Consistent with theClean Air Act, many States have adopted NOx reasonably availablecontrol technology requirements for combustion facilities. Inaddition, several States have adopted market-based approaches. TheSouth Coast Air Quality Management District in Southern California,for example, adopted a NOx and SO2 emissions trading program(called RECLAIM). The Northeast and mid-Atlantic States thatcomprise the Ozone Transport Region have developed a region-wideNOx emissions trading program (the Ozone Transport Commission NOxBudget Program). The revised ozone NAAQS and new PM2.5 NAAQS couldlead to further regulation of power plant SO2 emissions (aprecursor to ambient PM2.5) and NOx emissions (both for PM2.5 andozone attainment strategies).The Act also requires State Implementation Plans to include apreconstruction permit program for new or modified major stationarysources, referred to as new source review ("NSR"). This programensures that when large, new facilities are built -- or majormodifications to existing facilities are made that result in a netemissions increase -- they include state-of-the-art air pollutioncontrol equipment. It also assures citizens who live near new majorsources of air pollution that the facilities will be as clean aspossible. The requirements are different for (1) the part of theprogram called the Prevention of Significant Deterioration programthat applies to construction projects in areas where the air isalready clean, and (2) the part of the program called thenon-attainment NSR program that applies to construction projects inareas where the air is unhealthy to breathe. For attainment areas,to prevent significant deterioration of our nation's air quality,new major sources and major modifications to existing sources mustapply the best available control technology and ensure that the newpollution introduced into the environment does not adversely impactthe air quality, such as in pristine areas like national parks. Fornonattainment areas, in addition to applying control technologythat represents the lowest achievable emission rates, new majorsources and major modifications must offset their emissionsincreases. This can be done by getting reductions from othersources in the general area to compensate for the increasesresulting from the new air pollution sources.The Act also requires EPA to establish new source performancestandards ("NSPS") that all new or modified sources must meetregardless of their location. The NSPS are technology-basednumerical performance standards that apply to all sources in aparticular source category, such as electric utility steamgenerating units or stationary gas turbines. These standards areintended to "level the playing field" so that all new facilitiesinstall a minimum amount of air pollution control equipment.The recently finalized regional haze rule will also requirepower generators to reduce SO2 and NOx emissions either through theimplementation of best available retrofit technology (BART) or atrading program yet to be developed. States must show "reasonableprogress" in their state implementation plans toward thecongressionally mandated goal of returning to natural conditions innational parks and wilderness areas.EPA is developing a rule to limit mercury emissions fromutilities. The 1990 CAA Amendments required EPA to study andprepare a report to Congress on the hazards to human health thatcan reasonably be expected to occur as a result of emissions ofhazardous air pollutants (air toxics or HAPs) from fossilfuel-fired electric power plants. Based on the Report to Congressand on other available information, EPA found in December 2000 thatair toxics control is appropriate for coal-fired and oil-firedutility boilers. As a result of that regulatory determination, EPAis scheduled to propose "Maximum Achievable Control Technology"(MACT) standards for these source categories by 2003. Given theconclusions of the Report, the regulation is likely to focus onmercury emissions.The utility industry is also required to reduce SO2 emissionsthrough the Acid Rain Trading Program described above. In addition,to address acid rain, the Clean Air Act requires utilities toreduce their emissions through emissions limits, which EPAestablished based on unit type.III. Health and Environmental Benefits of the President'sEnergy PlanThe President's Energy Plan recognizes that by conserving energyand limiting NOx, SO2 and mercury emissions, we can provide thecountry with significant public health and environmental benefits.The problems we would address include: fine particle pollution,visibility degradation, ozone pollution, mercury deposition, acidrain, nitrate deposition and climate change. In turn, this willavoid incidences of premature mortality, aggravation of respiratoryand cardiopulmonary illnesses, and diminished lung function whichresults in lost work days, school absences and increasedhospitalizations and emergency room visits, and will also avoiddamage to eco-systems, fish and other wildlife. To understand thetremendous benefits of the President's plan, we need to understandthe public health and environmental issues.Emissions from Power GenerationPower generators are a significant source of three keyemissions: sulfur dioxide (SO2), nitrogen oxide (NOx), and mercury(Hg). The Clean Air Act has been, and will continue to be, asuccessful tool in reducing these emissions. However, while we areobserving significant environmental improvement, power generationstill contributes 67% of SO2, 25% of NOx, and 37% of man-mademercury. (Power generation has other emissions, such as carbonmonoxide and coarse particles, but the level of these emissionsposes smaller risks for public health and the environment.)One of the reasons power generation accounts for such a largeshare of these key emissions is that significant emissionsreductions have already been required from other sources. Forexample, a new car today is more than 90% cleaner than it wasbefore federal laws limiting emissions of CO, NOx and volatileorganic compounds - and they are subject to further reductionsstarting in 2004, as are heavy duty trucks in 2007. In contrast,some older power plants, built before certain Federal performancestandards were put into place, are still operating without modernpollution control equipment for some emissions.Air Quality EffectsFINE PARTICLE POLLUTION:The President's Energy Plan will reduce fine particle pollution.SO2 and NOx emissions from power generation react in the atmosphereto form nitrates and sulfates, which are a substantial fraction offine particle (PM2.5) pollution. (Some PM2.5 comes from directemissions from a variety of sources.) A source emitting NOx and SO2can cause PM2.5 many miles away. A substantial body of publishedscientific literature recognizes a correlation between elevatedfine particulate matter and increased incidence of illness andpremature mortality. The health impacts include aggravation ofchronic bronchitis, hospitalizations due to cardio-respiratorysymptoms, emergency room visits due to aggravated asthma symptoms,and acute respiratory symptoms. Based on these findings, EPA andothers estimate that attaining the fine particle standards wouldavoid thousands, and up to tens of thousands, of premature deathsannually.The significant expansion in scientific research in recent yearshas enhanced our understanding of the effects of particles onhealth. EPA is summarizing all new information in the ongoingreview of the particulate matter standard in a "criteria document"that will undergo extensive peer and public review. VISIBILITY AND REGIONAL HAZE IMPACTS:The President's Energy Plan will improve visibility by reducingSO2 and NOx emissions. Sulfates and nitrates that form in theatmosphere from SO2 and NOx emissions are significant contributorsto visibility impairment in many national parks and wildernessareas, as well as urban areas across the country. Sulfates are akey factor in all areas of the United States, particularly in theEast, where high humidity increases the light extinction efficiencyof sulfates. Sulfates are responsible for 6080% of total lightextinction in the East, based on data collected during the 1990'sin eastern national parks such as Acadia, Everglades, Great SmokyMountains, Shenandoah, and in Washington, DC.In the West, sulfates account for approximately 25-50% ofvisibility impairment. Nitrates can play a larger role invisibility problems in some portions of the West than in the East.For example, nitrates account for 20-40% of visibility impairmentin national parks and wilderness areas in Southern California. Inmany urban areas, NOx emissions from cars, trucks, and power plantscontribute to winter time "brown cloud" situations.C OZONE:The President's Energy Plan will reduce ozone by reducing NOx, akey contributor to the formation of ground-level ozone. In thepresence of sunlight, NOx and volatile organic compounds reactphotochemically to produce ozone. NOx can be transported longdistances and contribute to ozone many hundreds of miles from itssource. More than 97 million people live in areas that do not yetmeet the health-based 1-hour ozone standard (based on 1997-1999data). The number would be even higher for the new 8-hour ozonestandard. Reducing ozone levels will result in fewerhospitalizations, emergency room and doctors visits for asthmatics,significantly fewer incidents of lung inflamation for atriskpopulations, and significantly fewer incidents of moderate tosevere respiratory symptoms in children.Not only will reducing ozone provide public health benefits, butit will avoid damage to ecosystems and vegetation. Ozone causesdecreased agricultural and commercial forest yields, increasedmortality and reduced growth of tree seedlings, and increased plantsusceptibility to disease, pests, and environmental stresses (e.g.,harsh weather). Since NOx emissions result in formation ofground-level ozone, reducing NOx emissions will reduce ozone levelsand thus reduce the deleterious effects of ozone on human healthand ecosystems.Deposition EffectsC MERCURY:The President's Energy Plan will benefit public health byreducing mercury air emissions. Mercury is highly toxic in smallquantities and Americans with diets with high levels of mercury areat risk for adverse health effects. Mercury is a naturallyoccurring element, but human activity mobilizes mercury in theenvironment, making it more bioavailable. After mercury is emittedto the air, it can be transported through the atmosphere for daysto years before being deposited into water bodies.Once mercury is deposited in lakes, rivers, and oceans, itbioaccumulates in the food chain, resulting in high concentrationsin predatory fish. In the U.S., most human exposure to mercury isthe result of consumption of fish contaminated with methylmercury.A recent report of the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) concludedthat while most Americans face a very low risk from methylmercury,children of women who consume large amounts of fish duringpregnancy face a much higher risk. Fetuses are particularlyvulnerable to methylmercury because of their rapidly developingnervous systems. These effects include cognitive, sensory, andmotor deficits. The NAS study estimates as many as 60,000 childrenannually may develop neurological problems because of low-levelmethylmercury exposure through their mother prior to birth.Forty-one states have advisories warning the public to restricteating fish from local waters due to methylmercury. EPA estimatesthat 5.6 million acres of lakes, estuaries and wetlands and 43,500miles of streams, rivers and coasts are impaired by mercuryemissions.ACID RAIN:The President's Energy Plan will reduce acid rain by reducingSO2 and NOx. Acidic deposition or "acid rain" occurs when SO2 andNOx in the atmosphere react with water, oxygen, and oxidants toform acidic compounds. These compounds fall to the Earth in eitherdry form (gas and particles) or wet form (rain, snow, and fog).Some are carried by the wind, sometimes hundreds of miles, acrossstate and national borders. In the United States, about 67 percentof annual SO2 emissions and 25 percent of NOx emissions areproduced by electric utility plants that burn fossil fuels.Although we have made progress as a result of the 1990 Acid RainProgram, we have not fully addressed the problem. Indicators ofrecovery of lakes and streams do not show consistent change inresponse to reduced SO2 emissions. In sensitive areas such as theAdirondacks, for example, the majority of lakes have remainedfairly constant in terms of acidification levels, while the mostsensitive lakes continue to acidify. Overall, acid depositioncontinues to impair the water quality of lakes and streams in theNortheast: 41 percent of lakes in the Adirondack region of New Yorkand 15 percent of lakes in New England exhibit signs of chronicand/or episodic acidification. Although sulfur deposition hasdeclined, nitrogen emissions have not changed substantiallyregion-wide. Moreover, recent findings also suggest that nitrogenis quantitatively as important or, in some areas, possibly moreimportant than sulfur as a cause of episodic acidification becauseof short-term acidic pulses occurring during the most biologicallysensitive time of the year, when fish reproduce. Reductions of NOx,particularly during winter and spring, are critical for addressingthese concerns. NITROGEN DEPOSITION:The President's Energy Plan will improve eco-systems and waterbodies by reducing NOx emissions. Some air emissions of NOx frompower generation result in deposition of nitrogen in soils andwater. While nitrogen is an essential nutrient, its availability isnaturally limited, making it an important factor in regulating thestructure and functioning of both terrestrial and aquaticecological systems. Human activity has greatly altered theterrestrial and atmospheric nitrogen cycle, doubling the annualamount of nitrogen available in forms that are useful to livingorganisms. Nitrogen saturation of watersheds contributes toenvironmental problems such as reduced drinking water quality,nitrateinduced toxic effects on freshwater organisms, increasedsoil acidification and aluminum mobility, increased emissions fromsoil of nitrogenous greenhouse trace gases, reduction of methaneconsumption in soil, and forest decline and reducedproductivity.Coastal water and marine environment are also impacted byatmospheric deposition of nitrogen. Depending upon the location,from 10 to more than 40 percent of new nitrogen inputs to coastalwaters along the East Coast and Gulf Coast of the United Statescome from air pollution. One of the best documented and understoodimpacts of increased nitrogen is the eutrophication of estuariesand coastal waters. Eutrophication refers to the increase in therate of supply of organic matter to an ecosystem and its manyundesirable consequences. Symptoms of eutrophication are found inmany of our nation's coastal ecosystems. They include algal bloomsthat are potentially hazardous to human health, low dissolvedoxygen concentrations, declines in the health of fish and shellfishpopulations, loss of seagrass beds and coral reefs, and ecologicalchanges in food webs.Summary of Health and Environmental EffectsAdopting a unified approach to reduce SO2, NOx and mercury isbetter than looking at each pollutant separately because ofsynergistic effects. Beyond their impacts as separate emissions,SO2, NOx, and mercury together contribute to many airpollution-related problems affecting human health and theenvironment. In certain cases, synergies exist between emissionsand among the various reduction approaches available, making itimperative that efforts to reduce risk address all three emissionsaccommodate these synergies. In the case of fine particles,atmospheric chemical relationships suggest that when only reducingsulfate for example, it is replaced in the atmosphere by nitrate.Thus, simultaneous NOx and SO2 emission reductions are critical. Inthe case of acid rain, significant reductions in sulfur dioxidehave not corresponded to ecological changes due to continuing highlevels of nitrogen. Continuing levels of sulfur deposition, albeitsmaller than before, also work to prevent recovery due to extremelylarge sulfur loadings over the years. Both emissions count inachieving the goal of recovery. Additionally, some synergies havebeen observed between methylmercury and lake acidity - the moreacidic, the greater the mercury concentration.As more environmental data become available and scienceimproves, we are observing some environmental improvementaccompanying the downward trend in emissions. However, there arepersistent and growing concerns regarding recovery of ecosystemsand the risks that air pollution pose to human health. Forinstance, nitrate levels in surface waters are not significantlyimproving, and at best are constant. Logically, if emissionscontinue at the same level, or increase, pollution problems willmirror that trend. Visibility impairment in national parks,wilderness areas and urban areas also continues to be a problem.Many people continue to be exposed to unacceptable levels of smog.Of particular significance --the American public has become acutelyaware of the hazards to their health, including the risk ofmortality, posed by inhalation of fine particles and exposure tomercury through fish consumption.IV Climate ChangeThe President's Energy Plan, and the climate change strategythat is under development, will provide benefits by addressingclimate change. Energy-related activities are the primary source ofU.S. man-made greenhouse gas emissions. Power generators, whichemit CO2, contribute abut 29% of the total emissions of all U.S.man-made greenhouse gases. Scientists continue to learn more aboutglobal climate change, its causes, potential impacts, and possiblesolution. We recently held Cabinet-level working group meetings toreview the most recent, most accurate and most comprehensivescience. During those meetings, we heard from scientists offering awide spectrum of views. We have reviewed the facts and listened tomany theories and suppositions. The working group asked the highlyrespected National Academy of Sciences to provide us the mostup-to-date information about what is known and about what is notknown on the science of climate change.We know the surface temperature of the Earth is warming. It hasrisen by .6 degrees Celsius over the past 100 years. There was awarming trend from the 1890s to the 1940s, cooling from the 1940sto the 1970s, and then sharply rising temperatures from the 1970sto today. There is a natural greenhouse effect that contributes towarming. Greenhouse gases trap heat and thus warm the Earth becausethey prevent a significant portion of infrared radiation fromescaping into space. Concentration of greenhouse gases, especiallyCO2, have increased substantially since the beginning of theindustrial revolution. And the National Academy of Sciencesindicates that the increase is due in large part to human activity.The Academy's report also tells us that there are many unansweredquestions about climate change, which makes it difficult todetermine what levels of greenhouse gas emissions need to beavoided.To address global climate change and greenhouse gas emissions,we are pursuing a broad array of conservation and energy efficiencygoals under the Administration's National Energy Policy as well asthe development of a comprehensive policy under the ongoingcabinet-level review for this issue. On June 11, President Bushannounced the establishment of two major initiatives to address themajor scientific and technological challenges presented by thisserious, long-term issue: the U.S. Climate Research Initiative andthe National Climate Change Technology Initiative. In addition, hecommitted the United States to increasing cooperative efforts inthe Western Hemisphere, and with our allies globally, toaggressively pursue joint research and actions. These efforts haverecently borne fruit, particularly recent agreements with Japan andItaly to collaborate on climate modeling efforts and with ElSalvador in a "forest for debt" swap that will preserve tropicalforests there that sequester carbon. The complex challenge ofglobal climate change requires a global response that will draw onthe power of global markets and the promise of technology toachieve emissions reductions most flexibly and costeffectively inthe coming century. The Administration intends to address thischallenge in that context, and will leverage our national resourcesto enhance our scientific understanding of global climate change,and develop the advanced energy technologies that the world willneed in coming decades to meet its energy and environmentalneeds.V. ConclusionOur country has made great progress in reducing air pollutionover the last several decades, but pollution from power generationneeds to be further controlled. We can draw no other conclusiongiven the significant contribution that power generation makes tothe emissions that cause such serious public health andenvironmental problems.But our current regulatory programs are not the most efficientway to achieve the goal of ensuring a reliable energy supply in anenvironmentally responsible manner. Rather than take apollutant-by-pollutant, problem-by-problem approach, we have theopportunity to examine the sector as a whole. Doing so provides uswith the opportunity for cost-effective reductions and significantpublic health and environmental gains. That is why thisAdministration supports the development of new legislation thatbuilds on the success of the market-based Acid Rain Program toreduce significantly the SO2, NOx and mercury emissions from powergeneration. Mandatory controls are not the only way to solve publichealth and environmental problems. President Bush's National EnergyPlan also includes measures to increase conservation of energy,increase energy efficiency, and encourage technological advancessuch as clean coal technology, fuel cells, and combined heat andpower facilities -- all of which will contribute to addressing theenergy and environmental challenges of11this industry.I have already spent time with representatives of the powergeneration sector and have heard from a number of them who areinterested in legislation that will provide the public health andenvironmental benefits we discussed today. I applaud their concernand their willingness to help craft a workable solution. I havealso heard from environmentalists who are interested in these sameissues. I know that many of you are interested in addressing theseissues through legislation. I hope that our common interests willlead us to a consensus - one that will provide the country withsignificant benefits. I look forward to working with you on theseissues.12