Before theGraphics Communications AssociationChicago, IllinoisDecember 6, 2000Good morning ladies and gentlemen.This is the third time I have participated in a GraphicsCommunications Association conference.My first GCA conference was in February of 1997, the 17th to beprecise, in Coral Gables, Florida. Norm Scharf lured me to Floridawith promises of sunshine, warm temperatures and the chance tofollow Gene Del Polito on a panel. It was cloudy, the temperaturenever got above 45 degrees Fahrenheit and, after listening to Geneproselytize about postal reform, I tried to enlist!Earlier this year, Norm invited me to the April 14th GCAconference in Clearwater, Florida. "How could I resist," he asked," a chance to get a head-start on my summer tan?" It rained---theentire time!When Norm called in June to ask if I would participate in anR2000-1 postmortem conference, I agreed on the condition that (1) Ispeak before Gene and (2) that I not be subjected to Florida'serratic weather.Norm, I see that Gene's performance is tomorrow---afternoon. So,I want to thank you on meeting my first condition.On your meeting my other condition, what can I say Norm butthank you. It certainly is a pleasure to be here in Chicago---inDecember!Now before you get upset with me, I think you need to know thereal reason we are in Chicago---in December. How many of you knowNeal Denton? Neal who is on theprogram tomorrow---with Gene---is rabid. Oops, I mean he is arabid baseball fan. So much so that he tries to see at least onegame at each major league diamond every year. Well, as I heard thestory, Denton was leaning into the plate in fantasy baseball camplast winter when he took a high, inside, fast ball on the head.Ever since he has been more confused than usual. Apparently hethought the Cubbies and the Chisox had a home and home inter-leagueseries this week. So, he convinced Norm to hold the conference outhere so he could get a "two-fer" on that every ballpark every yeardeal.By the way, for those of you who want the straight skinny on whyI'm leaving the Commission, that's Denton's fault, too! He told methat there is a "three strikes and you're out" rule forcommissioners on omnibus rates cases. And, judging from thecomments some of you have been making, it appears that I didn'tmake it to first base in the R2000-1 game. I've got to tell you,though, that most industry comments pale by comparison to some ofthe suggestions I received from the general public on what I can dowith the 34 cent stamp.Seriously, though, I know some of you are not all that happywith a number of the Commission's recommendations. I will speak tosome of the concerns of which I have become aware. And, while I donot mean to suggest that I view anyone's concerns as beingparochial, I think it might be useful to set the broader stage ofpostal ratemaking---to lay out the general principles that guidethe Commission's conclusions. I also plan to spend a few minutesdiscussing the state of USPS finances and mention a couple of othermatters of more than passing interest---at least to me, and I hopeto you.The law that established the US Postal Service in 1970 providesthat the Postal Service may, from time to time, request that thePostal Rate Commission recommend "rates and fees [that] shallprovide sufficient revenue so that the total estimated incometothe Postal Service will equal as nearly as practicable the totalestimated costs of the Postal Service."But the Commission isn't free to make just any oldrecommendations so long as the numbers add up. It has to act inaccordance with the general policies set forth in the PostalReorganization Act and nine specific ratemaking factors. 3622. Rates and fees(1) the establishment and maintenance of a fair and equitableschedule;(2)the value of the mail service actually provided eachclass or type ofmail service to both the sender and the recipient,including but not limited to the collection, mode oftransportation, and priority of delivery;(3)the requirement that each class of mail or type of mailservice bearthe direct and indirect postal costs attributable tothat class or type plus that portion of all other costs of thePostal Service reasonably assignable to such class ortype;(4)the effect of rate increases upon the general public,business mailusers, and enterprises in the private sector of theeconomy engaged in the delivery of mail matter other thanletters;(5)the available alternative means of sending and receivingletters andother mail matter at reasonable costs;(6)the degree of preparation of mail for delivery into thepostal systemperformed by the mailer and its effect upon reducingcosts to the Postal Service;(7)simplicity of structure for the entire schedule andsimple, identifiablerelationships between the rates or fees chargedthe various classes of mail for postal services;(8)the educational, cultural, scientific, and informationalvalue to therecipient of mail matter; and(9) such other factors as the Commission deems appropriate.Factor number three deserves special mention as it is themandatory factor. It is at the heart of many a difference ofopinion between the PRC and the Service, the Service and mailers,mailers and the PRC, and between groups of mailers. It is thefactor that causes the Commission to examine all operational costs,from collection to delivery and the processing that takes place inbetween. It is the bedrock on which rates are based. Each subclassmust generate sufficient revenue to cover its costs. This policy isimportant for another reason. It, combined with factor number six,forms the basis for the many, important work-sharing discounts thatare on the books.It seems to me that, at times, critics of Commissionrecommendations tend to take lightly the considerations embodied in39 USC 3622(b)(3) and (6). "How come," they ask, "did we wind upwith an increase that was larger than that proposed by the USPS,when almost everyone else got a break?" There are usually a numberof reasons that situations like this occur. For example, theCommission believes that costs vary more directly with volume thandoes the USPS. As a consequence, the PRC costing methodologygenerally attributes a larger portion of total operating costs thandoes the Service.But why not even things out by ignoring cost differentialsbetween, say, letters and flats; cost differential put on the tableby the USPS a decade ago? Why not just look the other way on thesecost differences, or level the playing field by passing on to somemail 300 percent of costs avoided by work-sharing? Why not givediscounts based on cost avoidances promised in a previous rate orclassification case but which savings were never captured by thePostal Service? Because it is one thing to encourage work-sharing,but quite another to ignore the law, and give revenue away. And,giving away revenue has an effect.Keep in mind the requirement that a subclass has to generaterevenue to cover its costs. Now, what happens when we giveexcessive discounts for some type of mail? Simple! We have to makeup the revenue from other mail, for example, by bumping up, if youwill, the benchmark from which those discounted rates aremeasured.One rather formidable group of mailers whose members willbenefit mightily from the Commission's recommendations, theperiodicals mailers, pointed out in a press statement that theoverall average increase for First-Class mail was much smaller thanthe average increase for mail their members send. Does it matterthat the cost of processing their mail went way up and the cost ofprocessing First-Class mail declined? Yes. By law, it must matterto the Commission!What if the Commission chose to ignore this divergence in costsand hit First-Class mail with a larger increase? Whose interestwould be served by our doing so and for how long?PRC R2000-1(Dollars in Millions)Total Contribution to Institutional Costs: $25,453Package Other Service 7.15% 0.89% $1,820Percent Contribution to Percent Institutional Percent VolumeRevenue CostTotal 100.0% 100.0% 100.00%1/ Includes Priority MailI want you to take a moment to look at this pie chart. I thinkit is important for everyone to understand the extent to whichFirst-Class mail is already carrying a disproportionate share ofthe institutional cost or overhead burden of the postal system.Now, forget about this rate case and put aside any notion that I amsuggesting others mailers should pay a larger share. Think insteadabout the discussion---the hand wringing--- that has been takingplace since the fall of last year when the General AccountingOffice unveiled an assessment prepared for the Postal Service by aPostal Service contractor concerning the extent to whichtransaction mail---First-Class mail---is likely to fall prey toelectronic bill presentment and payment. Should we load up on thattype of mail---give it heftier increases? Might not doing so justaccelerate the departure of this mail from the system? When thatmail leaves the system, who gets to eat that big slice of theinstitutional cost pie that First Class mail currently enjoys?Now, remember a few minutes ago when I talked about theCommission and Postal Service difference of opinion on the matterof how costs vary with volume? In the USPS view of the world,institutional costs are a larger share of total costs and fewercosts can be expected to be shed, if and when, say, transactionmail leaves the system. This means, potentially, an even biggerslice of institutional pie for someone else---one of you, toswallow. Not a pleasant prospect and not one easily avoided---noteven by any reform package or proposal that I've seen.Well, I guess I have already crossed the line and gotten intosome specifics of the R20001 case. And, I did not paint a horrificpicture of the future, just so you might think the present PRCrecommendation ain't so bad, after all. However, before I lose theforest---and a very important one it is---for the trees, I want tostep back a bit.In my almost seven years at the helm of the PRC, if I havelearned nothing else, I've learned that each case presents a newchallenge. In this case the challenge lay in evaluating theService's request for additional funds over and above its expectedoperating expenses.Last January the Postal Service proposed an array of rateincreases designed to generate an additional $2.8 billion inrevenue. What was unusual about this request was that roughly $1.7billion of these dollars was for a contingency, a hedge against theunknown---to cover unforeseen events. Another quarter billion plusdollars of the total amount sought was earmarked to pay downoperating debt accrued in past years.The size of the contingency quickly became a cause celebre withmany parties to the rate case. They sponsored evidence challengingthe need for a cushion so substantially above and beyond the PostalService's own best estimate of future increases in the cost ofcollecting, processing and delivering the mail.And, as you probably know, in presenting estimates of its futureneeds, the Postal Service used financial and operational data fromfiscal year 1998 as a benchmark. Unfortunately, by the time theService filed its request, fiscal year 1999 had already come andgone. The Commission requested and the Postal Service completed anupdate of its original cost projections in mid-July.To give you a flavor of the impact of this updating effort,which allowed the Commission to use more recent information thanwas in the Service's initial package, let's look at a few of thechanges:Notwithstanding the comments of one of the PostalGovernors at the November Board meeting about not being able torecover increased fuel costs and the need for flexibility to permitthem to level a fuel surcharge, the USPS was able to factor intothe update the increased costs of fueling its deliveryfleet.Despite the comments of a Governor concerning costsassociated with the NALC arbitration, the USPS was able to includethese additional labor costs in the update.It also was able to take account of the dollarsassociated with actual cost-of-living adjustments, health insuranceand the like, which were higher than earlier projectedfigures.But the update was not one-sided, only adding new costs, some$450 million. The Postal Service also presented additional revenueand costing-cutting initiatives, such as the billion-dollar-a-year"break through productivity plan" announced by the PostmasterGeneral this past spring. Unfortunately, the Postal Service wasonly willing to commit to saving slightly more than one half thehighly publicized, promised amount.The one item that did not change in the Postal Service updatewas the contingency. The $1.7 billion remained.The many parties who had already argued that a $1.7 billioncontingency was unreasonable before the update, were absolutelycertain that amount was unjustified given the incorporation of newcost data and shorter time frame for prognosticating.The evidence presented by the parties on the contingency issuewas determinative. My colleagues and I, reduced the requestedamount by $700 million, leaving a $1 billion contingency. Weconcluded that this amount more than met the reasonablenessstandard of the law.Now, you should know that I put these remarks together over theweekend, before the December board meeting that took place Mondayand Tuesday of this week. So, I had no idea of what action theGovernors might take. It would not surprise me, however, if thegovernors returned the case because we cut the contingency, if forno other reason than that the USPS views the contingency as itsprivate sandbox and doesn't want the PRC playing there.Nevertheless, I think the Governors should be quite happy with abillion dollar contingency since, after all, at the boardmeeting---at least some of the Governors apparently did not evenknow there was a contingency provision. One Governor is said tohave remarked at the public meeting that he thought the PostalService needed some mechanism for recovering unforeseenexpenses!You have already heard the doom and gloom projections about USPSfinances generally and about this Recommended Decision notproviding the Postal Service with sufficient revenue to breakevenin the current fiscal year. But think about this: if rate increasesare implemented in January---which the Service has indicated islikely---and the Service's best estimate from just this past Julyis on target, the Postal Service should be sitting on a sizablecushion at the end of this fiscal year. Put another way, based onthe evidence the Postal Service put on the record during rebuttalhearings as recently as this past August 30th, in the absence ofthe occurrence of unforeseen events costing more than---the portionof the full $1 billion contingency earned when new rates areimplemented in January, $600 million, the Service should do quitewell with what we recommend.This is, I believe, a good point to do a comparison of theevidentiary record the Commission based its decision on and thefinancial picture postal officials are now painting just threemonths later.UNEXPLAINED CHANGE IN USPS FY 2001 FINANCIAL POSIT IONUNEXPLAINED CHANGE IN USPS FY2001 FINANCIAL POSITION ($Millions)Net Income PRC R2000-1 Rate Decision - 11/13/00 1,342Impact of Jan. 2001 Delayed Rate Implementation (658)Adjusted FY 2001 Net Income 684Operating Plan - 11/14/00 (480) (Expected Net Loss)Unexplained Swing in Net Income: (1,164) (11/13/00 compared to11/14/00)I have a couple of tables I want to share with you. Each carriesthe title "Unexplained Change in USPS FY 2001 FinancialPicture."The first table is based on USPS assumptions regarding rates,costs, volumes, contingency and recovery of prior years'losses.When the Service filed its case last January, we all weretold the net income for FY2001, after covering increased operatingcosts, would be $1.9 billion---$1.7 billion for the contingency and$250 million for recover of prior years losses.When the Service filed its July update, which it couldhave modified during rebuttal in late August, we were told the netincome for FY2001 would be $1.5 billion.When you adjust those figures for a Januaryimplementation, you get a positive $630 million on the bottomline.But the USPS operating plan presented to and approved bythe Board in mid-November shows a deficit of almost $500 millioneven if the Commission had rubber-stamped the original Servicerequest.When ones substitutes generally lower PRC rates and usesall other USPS assumptions, one still gets a positive, albeit muchsmaller, bottom line---the $132 million figure.Going from a plus $630 million to a minus $480 million isa swing of $1.1 billion.The second table shows the numbers using PRC assumptions andrecommended rates.So, regardless of whether one uses the Service's updatedassumption or the Commission's rates and assumptions, there hasbeen an unexplained swing of $1.1 billion in the projected bottomline for FY 2001 in just a couple of months!Were the July-August updates that far off target? We nowknow one figure, the FY2000 ink was not as red as the USPS thoughtit would be---the loss is $199 million as opposed to the $325million they projected last July. But that's good!Are the November operating plan figures wrong?Has that USPS commitment for half the promised "breakthough productivity" fallen through?Has something else happened?If so, what is the explanation?I know that some of you are unhappy with the Commission'srecommendations as they relate to your mail. I don't mean to beglib about your concerns, but if I were you, I might be moreconcerned about the near-term rate implications of this $1.1 bottomline swing. For those of you who have only disdain for the currentratemaking process---the length of time it takes and the cost oflitigation---please keep in mind that the PRC process affords theonly opportunity you may have to truly scrutinize this swing beforeyou get the next $1.1 billion plus kick in your billfold.Now, about our recommended rates: Could we have made differentrecommendations? Most certainly! Would they have been betterrecommendations? Maybe!But let's look at the score card on how the several classes madeout:By our count, roughly 87 percent of Standard mail willhave rates that are less than or equal to those proposed by thePostal Service.Almost all Periodical mail rates will be lower than thoseproposed by the Postal Service.The average increase in Parcel Post, save the not sosmall matter of a non-machinable surcharge that impacts about 3percent of total volume, is on target with the USPSrequest.Priority Mail, Bound Printed Matter and Media Mail---goshI'm having a hard time keeping up with all these namechanges---took a bit of a hit, 1 percent more, give or take, thanthe USPS requested, based primarily on cost updates.Nonprofits benefited from last minute legislation andwill have smaller increases than would have otherwise been thecase.However, we did not, as you know, lower the Standard pound rateas much as the Service wanted and we did not raise the breakpoint.To those who choose to be supercritical of the Commission regardingour recommendations in these areas, I hope you will consider thatratemaking generally involves a zero sum situation where one worksagainst a revenue target. Lowering pound rates or raisingbreakpoints may benefit some mailers, but it will also have anegative impact on others who find themselves dealing, for example,with higher piece rates and the like.I have a host of one-liners I've collected over the years that Ithought about using at this point in response to some of thesecritics who think we missed a "no-brainer," but I won't do that.One will suffice. It's the one that comes to mind when I thinkabout how smart I was before I actually had to deal first hand withan omnibus rate case. It's the H.L. Mencken line I've used before:"For ever problem there is a solution that is simple, neat,plausible and wrong!"Let's see now, where am I?Lay out guiding principles. Check!Talk about rate recommendations. Check!USPS finances-the $1.1 billion swing. Check!Saw barrel off shotgun and fire at critics.Check!I'm forgetting something. Ah, those other matters ofpassing interest.I'll try not to take too long, but I get to do this because thismay be my last shot as Chairman of the PRC. And, you know what theysay---Today a peacock tomorrow a feather duster! So, here goes-(1) Postal or legislative reform or whatever you want to callit: I am NOT opposed to postal reform! I just believe, to quote hisFebruary 28, 2000, MIDS article, that that great American, Mr. CaryBaer, had it right when he said, "Before we develop solutions weneed to reach some consensus on the problem." We've all got ourcampaign ribbons from the war of HR22. Some people want to pick upthat very tattered battle flag, put on their brightest red coats,form into straight lines and march one more time up Jenkin's Hill.For those of you who may not know, Jenkin's Hill is the hill onwhich sits the U.S. Capitol. Price caps may sound more attractivewith every passing rate case. But, as I have tried to explain tosome of you, costs trumped caps in HR22; that is, you were stilllikely to see increases akin to those you experience under currentlaw. I propose that, rather than charging up the same hill with thesame old, tired ammunition, let's all of us regroup---andrethink.Dilbert kind of sums it up for me when it comes to postalreform.(2)A better bet for legislation in the 107th Congress, andone that may be as important to the postal community as someperceive postal reform to be, is in the privacy area dealing withthe collection and sharing of personal data. This is an area I knowa bit about from a previous incarnation as the point man oninformation policy at the then Department of HEW in the 1970s.Overly restrictive privacy legislation at the federal level or,even worse, 50 different restrictive state bills could spelldisaster for everyone up and down the chain from graphics and copypeople to printers to cataloguers to envelope manufactures to banksand to shipping and logistics companies. You've got a splitcongress and an issue with bipartisan appeal. Convincingconservatives of the benefits of federal preemption and liberals ofthe benefits of limiting causes of action, both stumbling blocks inthe past, might be doable as 107th searches for common ground. Theresult could be a framework everyone can live with.(3)Negotiated Service Agreements. Setting aside for themoment the pros and cons of notice versus pre-approval, for sometime now I have been preaching that NSOs are by and large nothingmore that narrowly drawn or niche classifications. We've alreadyapproved several such USPS proposals. I urge the Service to moveforward with whatever proposals they have developed. If mailers, asmall group of or even one of them, can perform some task that maydrive costs out of the system, let's get on withit---now!(4)And last but not least, another Ed Gleiman suggestion---Itry to include at least one classification and/or cost savingsproposal in each speech. This one is buried in aconcurring opinion to the R2000-1 decision. Certified Mail iscostly to the Postal Service and the consumer. Along with ReturnReceipt, also not cheap, these oldfashioned offerings are frequentrecipients of criticism from users. Delivery Confirmation, on theother hand, is a high tech, low cost service that works and workswell. By extending Delivery Confirmation to First-Class mail as areplacement for Certified Mail, the potential exists to drive inexcess of $300 million per year in window clerk and letter carriercosts from the system. I could be wrong about all this, and I don'twant to fall into my old buddy H. L. Mencken's simple solutionstrap, but that's a heap of money, and I think this one deservessome prompt consideration by the folks at postal HQ!It's pretty clear that some of you are tired of hearing from meand others, I gather from the snoring, are just plain tired. So, Ibest wrap things up.When I talked with Bill Hoyt the other day, he said I wasobligated to wrap up with a story or joke. I told him I didn't haveany new material. He offered that hardly anyone ever listens towhat I say anyway, so you all would not even know that I wasrecycling old material. Let's see if he is right.John Nolan and I were talking about some of hisresponsibilities. You know all those letters that kids write toSanta. Well, seems Bill Henderson used to handle the responses,personally. Bill has delegated that and now those letters all go toJohn. Turns out that Bill got one letter last year that just toreat his heartstrings. A little boy wrote that since his father'sdeath, his mother was having a hard time making ends meet. Thelittle fellow asked nothing for himself, only that Santa send hismother $100. Well, the PMG, being the kind soul that he is, reachin his pocket, pulled out one of those nice, crisp, new $50 dollarbills and mailed it to the boy's mother. The boy wrote Santa againthis year, and the letter wound up in John's in box. He shared acopy and I would like to share it with you.Dear Santa, Thanks so much for all you did last Christmas.Things are still pretty rough for us, and my mom sure could useanother $100. And, if you don't mind, Santa, when you send it to mymom, please don't route it through Washington. The last time theydeducted 50 percent.Actually, that is an old J. Edward Day joke, or so I've beentold, not an Edward J. Gleiman joke. I thought it fit both theholiday season and the postal rate case postmortem.