Edward J. GleimanSpeech before theEnvelope Manufacturers AssociationWilliamsburg, VA October 29, 2000Good morning ladies and gentlemen.The law provides that the Postal Service may, from time to time,request that thePostal Rate Commission recommend "rates and fees [that] shallprovide sufficient revenues so that total estimated income to thePostal Service will equal as nearly as practicable total estimatedcosts of [operating] the Postal Service."On January 12th the Postal Service submitted such a requestseeking an additional $3.7 million dollars in revenue to begenerated by an overall average rate increase of approximately 6.4percent. After lengthy deliberations, during which the Commissionheld 40 days of hearings to consider 178 pieces of testimonypresented by 122 witnesses representing 77 participants, includingthe Postal Service, the Commission has concluded that the---- Waita minute, I think I picked up the wrong presentation on my way outof the office yesterday.Let me try again.Good morning ladies and gentlemen.When Maynard invited me to visit with you, I plumb forgot thatthe Commission would be in the final throes of the R2000-1 ratecase in late October. So, while it would certainly be a pleasure tobe here under normal circumstances, I want to extend a specialthanks to you for having me here today. If for no other reason, ithas provided an excuse to escape for a day the pressure--cookeratmosphere associated with putting the finishing touches on a majorrate case decision.Good Lord willing and the creek don't rise, or perhaps I shouldsay if the computers don't crash, we hope to have that decision outon Monday, November 13th.Maynard suggested that I talk about the future-- about postalreform, its impact on the Commission and other changes the postalcommunity may be facing. Before I whip out my somewhat cloudycrystal ball, I thought you might be interested in a brief outlineof the process currently associated with postal rate making. And,as I talk about the process, I will attempt to debunk a few mythsand set the record straight on what you may have heard at previousget togethers. I will also talk about an issue that I believe hasgreater potential to impact the future well-being of the PostalService and the postal community than the much discussed diversionof transactional mail to electronic bill paying.Prior to 1970, postage rates were set by the Congress. Rates,generally, did not cover the costs of providing service, soCongress appropriated tax dollars to make up the difference. ThePostal Reorganization Act of 1970 changed all that. It replaced thePost Office Department with a new United States Postal Service andcharged it with operating in a more business-like fashion. Congresswould no longer set postal rates, but it wanted to ensure that thepublic had an opportunity to be heard before the Postal Servicechanged rates or services. Therefore, it simultaneously establisheda separate, independent Postal Rate Commission to provide an openprocess in which the public could participate in the development ofpostage rates.Myth Number One: Contrary to what you may have heard or read,although the PRC was not among the 1968 recommendations of theKappel Commission---appointed by the President to study the futureof the Post Office Department---neither did it spring forth like aphoenix from the ashes in some secret conference between House andSenate legislators. Permit me, if you will, to correct the record.The key elements were there the entire time. I read from theconference report on the 1970 Act at page 84-The House bill containeda Postal Rate Board as an independentagency not part of the Postal Service. The Senate amendmentcontainedan independent Postal Rate Commission within the PostalService. The conference substitute adopts the House provision (fora freestanding entity)changing the name to the (Senate proposed)Postal Rate CommissionPerhaps there is a lesson or two here for those who yearn for anew Kappel-type presidential commission as some sort of panacea tomakerecommendations to mold the future of the Postal Service.Commissions study and recommend, the President proposes and theCongress disposes---as it sees fit!Congress intended that mailers should be able to use the PostalRate Commission's proceedings to assure that some mailers were notcrosssubsidizing other mailers and to assure that postage ratesreflected the costs actually incurred to provide service. Further,by requiring the Service to justify rate and service changes,Congress hoped to provide a check on inefficiency.Each of you probably has your own point of view on how well thesystem works to keep the Postal Service lean and efficient. But Ihope you would agree that if mailers participate, and if the PostalService is subject to public scrutiny, the result is likely to bebetter than if proposals go entirely unreviewed. A case in pointcan be found in the last omnibus rate case, the R97-1 case.Mailer participation in developing the public evidentiaryrecord was responsible in part for enabling the Commission to shavesome $750 million---almost one third---off of the Service's requestfor additional revenue. As a result, almost everyone received asmaller rate increase than would have otherwise been thecase.Another example: periodicals mailers, stung by sharplyrising costs associated with the processing of their mail, insistedthat postal officials join them in an effort aimed at findinganswers and ferretingintervenor told us on the record---a rocket shot compared tomost rate-type proceedings. Moreover, when the Commission doesattempt to shave some time off of the 10 months provided in thelaw, representatives of mailers both large and small object.Mailers want as much time as possible to examine the reams of datathe Postal Service provides in support of its proposals. With theirmoney at stake, Mailers prefer that things be done right ratherthan fast! By the way, the original 1970 law contained no timelimit on rate cases. The 10-month limit was added after one of theearly cases, overseen by an administrative law judge, recruitedfrom another agency, seemed to go on forever.Some think that we ought to go back in time, ought to get rid ofthe Commission and replace it with not one but three administrativelaw judges to be borrowed from some other government agency. Badidea! But don't take my word for it. Shakespeare wanted me toremind those who prefer a return to Admin Law Judges that "What'spast is prologue." And, Santayana asked me to add that "Those whocannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it."I mentioned that the Commission also has other responsibilitieswhich impact the postal community. These include: 1) approving bothchanges in existing services and the establishment of newservices---those are known as classification cases; 2) adjudicatingcomplaints from anyone who believes the Postal Service is notproviding rates or services as required by law; 3) issuing advisoryopinions when the Postal Service proposes a substantiallynationwide change in the nature of its services; and, 4) our mostlyrecently assigned task, providing Congress with annual reportsabout the costs and revenues of international mail.Finally, the Commission is given 120 days to consider appealsfrom those who contend the Postal Service has proposed closingtheir local post office without following the safeguard proceduresCongress wrote into law.This brings me to Myth Number Three: The Postal Service cannotclose a post office without first obtaining the approval of thePostal Rate Commission, which supposedly takes four years.The facts are that the PRC gets involved in only appeals ofclosings and then for only 120 days. That's four months. Not fouryears! You can't get four years out of the equation even if you useWashington fuzzy math!And how many closings have been appealed? According to a 1997GAO report only 296 of 2,614 closings were appealed over a 20-yearperiod. I make that to be about 11 percent. And, what was thedisposition of those appeals, you ask? USPS affirmed in 170 cases;31 cases dismissed; and only 58 remanded on grounds that the USPShad not complied with the procedural requirements of the law.Number of times the Commission took more than 120 days to rule onan appeal, Zero! Number of cases in which the USPS was told by thePostal Rate Many years ago, when I was just starting my governmentcareer, one of my mentors gave me some advice, in the way of aquote purportedly from one Petronius Arbiter in 210 B.C.Actually, I'm not opposed to change---to postal reform. Duringmy time at the Commission, we've made quite a few changes. We'veissued rules to encourage experimentation by the Postal Service andestablished procedures for expedited treatment of non-controversialcases. We've established a website on which we post overnight everydocument filed with the Commission, and we've created a searchengine that enables everyone to word search these documents.Want to find out how many times and in what context the aspectratio of envelopes was mentioned in the current rate case? Howabout in each and every case all the way back to 1971? Try ourwebsite!Change is not the problem. The problem is---my concern is---that much of what has been on the table in the way of postal reformover the past several years is tantamount to an uncontrolled anduncontrollable experiment. Maybe it is my training in the sciencescoming to the fore, or maybe it's my belief that the Postal Serviceis too important to our economy and too intertwined in our everydaylives and livelihood to leave too much to chance.Let me make clear at this point that I have a great deal ofadmiration for Representative John McHugh and his staff. In thealmost 17 years I spent on Capitol Hill I cannot remember more thana handful of instances in which a member invested more of him orherself in an issue. And, although I took issue with a number ofprovisions in his bill, I consider it unfortunate, that theChairman has run out of time in his search for the "Holy Grail" ofpostal reform. It is unclear who, if anyone, will take up thechallenge in the 107th Congress.In the event that someone does take up the McHugh gauntlet andseeks your support, I think it is important that you, that mailersnot just blindly endorse a bill simply because its title includesthe phrase "postal reform."Which rates would be lawful in this scenario? The capped ratesthat do not cover cost or the rates that exceed the cap but covercosts? What's a Postal Regulatory Commissioner to do? More to thepoint, what's a mailer really likely to experience in the way ofrate increases?By the way, it's not altogether clear that this price cap regimewould achieve one of its other principle objectives, that is, toput downward pressure on future cost increases. Why? Because thebill has an "exigencies" escape clause and another provision thatprohibits the PRC from taking any action that might impact labornegotiations. No, I'm not suggesting that the last provision Imentioned be drop from any future bill. I do think, however, thatsome consideration should be given to a statutory revenue cap asone means of adding a bit of starch to the spine cost containment.Without an effective cost containment program---and I have yet tosee one---the Postal Service, reformed or not, cannot be whatmailers want. It cannot be a low cost, efficient provider ofservice.These examples are just a couple of the problems in the reformbill that many in the community wanted to put on a fast trackthrough Congress.Everyone talks about how it has been 30 years since the PostalReorganization Act was enacted; that the postal landscape is verydifferent; that now is time to change the law. Again, I am notopposed to legislative reform, but, if we are going to put ourmoney on legislative reform, we had better get it right, becauseonce that next major postal bill---a reform bill---is enacted, itmay be another 30 more years before we get a shot at fixing thingsagain.And, what would legislative reform mean for the PRC? Ifsomething akin toH.R.22 were enacted, the Commission would be neitherstrengthened norweakened. It would be different! It would berelegated largely to after the fact audits as opposed to itscurrent pre-approved role. And, it would grow to perhaps three orfour times its current complement of 55 bodies.Now, while we are figuring out what should be done in the way oflegislative change, we---the postal community, the Postal Serviceand the Postal Rate Commission---should not just sit back and wait.There is much to explore; much that can be done within the confinesof current law. We need to push the edges of the envelope---allthem!The EMA is already working on a number of forward-thinkingprojects. As one of the world's slowest and worst typists---I guessthey call it keyboarding now---I especially like the idea ofenvelopes carrying information I can scan into my computer toconnect with a vendor's website or with an information source.Let me throw out a few of my ideas for change that are notconditioned on congressional action: NSAs, or negotiated service agreements, have been a hot topicin the legislative equation. NSAs are, for all intents andpurposes, not very different from narrowly drawn classificationproposals; a number of which the Commission has received andapproved over the past few years. If the Service has any suchproposals on the drawing board, it ought to send them over. Ifmailers have ideas, they ought to submit them. If someone thinks weneed to modify our regulations to encourage niche classificationcases, let us know. NSAs are doable under current law! Why wait forlegislation, if we can act now to drive costs out of the system andlower rates for qualified mailers? -Just before the R97 case was filed, when many in thecommunity were concerned about the size of the Service's request, Isuggested that a case calling for rates to be phased--in over timemight help avoid the rate shock that comes with large, double digitincreases. This was not an entirely new idea. It was a take--off ona joint USPS-PRC task force recommendation in the early '90s for afour-year rate cycle with a mid-cycle adjustment. These proposalsreflected the purported desire of mailers for smaller and,implicitly, more frequent rate increases. We now seem to be in atwo-year rate case cycle. Mailers are, however, understandablyconcerned over the cost of litigating these more frequent cases.But by phasing in rates, they may be able to have their cake andeat it, too-- smaller periodic increases and fewer cases tolitigate. It is time, I believe, to dust off the task forcerecommendation and/or to give some serious thought to the phasedrate approach. -I mentioned our website a bit earlier. We've been told thatgetting documents posted overnight and providing a search enginehas resulted in substantial savings to intervenors and the PostalService. The Commission can and should do more in this area. With alittle cooperation from the community, I think we can implementelectronic filing and service of documents.I've already made several suggestions in the package servicesarea: When I spoke to the Parcel Shippers Association in June oflast year I suggested that, given the Service's economies of scalein delivery, alliances with other transportation or delivery firmsto carry their parcels the last milemade sense---and would make dollars for the Postal Service. Thisishappening already. I've also suggested that the Service explore making low weightParcel Post a wholesale, only, product and pushing low weightover-the-counter retail parcels into Priority Mail. The pricedifferential between Priority Mail and single piece parcels is verysmall. For just a couple of cents more, an individual can send apackage Priority, and, if the individual purchases deliveryconfirmation, it becomes actually less expensive to use the fasterPriority Mail service! Faster service at a lower price meanssatisfied customers!Speaking of delivery confirmation, it is currently available forPriority and Parcel Post. The USPS has proposed extending thisservice to Standard mail. My thought here: Why stop with Standard?There are roughly a quarter billion pieces of First--Class mail forwhich individuals purchase the more expensive Certified Mailoption. Delivery of a Certified Mail piece is more costly to thePostal Service than handling a delivery confirmation piece.Certified mail requires the carrier to make a special trip to thedoor. If the carrier is already equipped with a scanner fordelivery confirmation purposes, the Service has an opportunity toavoid the time---and time is money---that it takes the carrier tomake that special trip to the door. Delivery confirmation providemore information quicker at less cost to both the Postal Serviceand the customer!As an old vaudevillian might say, "I've got a million of'em"---Well, maybe not that many, but it is, I think, time to moveon. I do want to assure you, though, that while I have been talkingtrees, I have not lost sight of the forest.Last October there was a congressional hearing at which theGeneral Accounting Office presented unverified Postal Serviceestimates of the impact of the diversion of First--Classmail---bills and payments---to new technologies. The lead on thestory was USPS volume to decline with a loss of $17 billion inrevenue. At 33 cents a pop, I make that to be just short of 50billion pieces of mail. And, the price of a stamp, according to thestory, it would increase by 17 cents!That is a pretty bleak picture! However, at the risk of beinglabeled a troglodyte, may I suggest that if you scratch the surfaceof that picture you might find that a few rays of sunshine stillremain for hard copy mail. While I have no doubt there will bediversion, my uneducated guess is that the glide path will belonger and the incline not so steep. Many believe that there willbe gains to offset losses in transactional mail volume. Forinstance, Bob Wientzen of DMA reported just a couple of weeks agothat high tech ventures are generating new volumes of hard copymail as what he called "pure play Web companies" launch cataloguesand direct mail campaigns to drive traffic to their Web sites.Maynard expressed similar views in a news article this past summer.Moreover, unless the Postal Service is incapable of shedding volumevariable costs or waits until 2008 before adjusting First--Classrates, the price of a stamp does not have to go up by 17 cents.Unless, it waits until 2008 to shore up its base, volumedeclinesMay not be so severe. What if I'm wrong? What if the worst casescenario does come to pass? As I recall from the numbers in thatJuly 20th Atlanta Journal-Constitution article, there goes much ofthat 8 percent of envelopes that currently carry bills andpayments. That is not a pleasant prospect, but it is a heck of alot better than the prospect of losing a big chunk of the remaining92 percent of your business because an overreaching law restrictsthe sharing of personal information and results in direct marketingvolumes going south.Personal privacy, one's right to control the use of his or herpersonal information, is a hot issue. It is a hard one to beagainst. And, it is a dangerous one to ignore, either as anindividual or as a business person.Elements of the postal or mailing community or whatever youmight call it have been engaged in the privacy issue at both thefederal and state levels. More often than not, those involved havebeen the businesses that would feel directly the impact ofrestrictions on the collection and sharing of person data---thelist companies, the direct marketers. Think about this: if thedirect marketers and list companies are forced to cut back becauseof data restrictions, won't that impact the manufacture of goodsthat are marketed? Might it result in printers printing fewercatalogues? Won't it impact the envelope manufactures? And, couldit not result in a decline in Postal Service volumesacross--the--board?Those members of the greater mailer-postal community who havenot been paying attention to the privacy issue must do so. Theymust join with others in a broad-based coalition that ignoresdifferences they may have on traditional postal issues. If there isless information and less prospecting, there will be fewer sales.Fewer sales means fewer parcels to deliver, whether by white truckswith an eagle or big, brown trucks. The community needs, as awhole, I believe, to be proactive in pursuing of a rational,nation-wide approach that addresses both the concerns, the rightsof individuals and the needs of the business community.I cut my teeth on information policy and personal privacy issuesabout 25 years ago, as project manager at the then Department ofHealth, Education and Welfare I worked directly on implementationof the federal records Privacy Act of 1974 and the 1974 schoolrecords access law. I support the cornerstone concept of theselaws, known as fair information practices. And, I submit that thefederal privacy law, governs the collection and use of personaldata by federal agencies and which provides agencies a modicum offlexibility, is a reasonable point of departure for futurediscussions of either industry selfregulation or legislation.I had best stop at this point, since I've taken more time andspouted off more than I should have. But let me leave you with athought to keep in mind, in the event you are asked to evaluate mypresentation.This fellow is flying a hot air balloon and suddenly realizes heis lost. He cuts back on the hot air, descends and yells to a manhe spots on the ground."Excuse me, can you tell me where I am?""Sure," the man yells back, "you're in a hot air balloon about30 feet above this field."'The balloonist yells back, "You must work in informationtechnology.""I do," replies the man, "but how did you know?""Well," shouts the balloonist, "everything you told me wastechnically correct, but it's of no use to anyone."The man on the ground thinks for a moment and yells back, "Youmust work in management.""Why, yes, I do," replies the balloonist proudly, "but how didyou know?""Well," says the man on the ground, "you don't know where youare or where you are going, but you expect me to be able to help.You're in the same position you were in before we met, but now it'smy fault!"Thank you for having me here this morning.