November 1999Standards for Internal Control in the Federal GovernmentGAO/AIMD-00-21.3.1ForewordFederal policymakers and program managers are continuallyseeking ways to better achieve agencies' missions and programresults, in other words, they are seeking ways to improveaccountability. A key factor in helping achieve such outcomes andminimize operational problems is to implement appropriate internalcontrol. Effective internal control also helps in managing changeto cope with shifting environments and evolving demands andpriorities. As programs change and as agencies strive to improveoperational processes and implement new technological developments,management must continually assess and evaluate its internalcontrol to assure that the control activities being used areeffective and updated when necessary.The Federal Managers' Financial Integrity Act of 1982 (FMFIA)requires the General Accounting Office (GAO) to issue standards forinternal control in government. The standards provide the overallframework for establishing and maintaining internal control and foridentifying and addressing major performance and managementchallenges and areas at greatest risk of fraud, waste, abuse, andmismanagement. Office of Management and Budget (OMB) CircularA-123, Management Accountability and Control, revisedJune 21, 1995, provides the specific requirements for assessingand reporting on controls. The term internal control in thisdocument is synonymous with the term management control (as used inOMB Circular A-123) that covers all aspects of an agency'soperations (programmatic, financial, and compliance).Recently, other laws have prompted renewed focus on internalcontrol. The Government Performance and Results Act of 1993requires agencies to clarify their missions, set strategic andannual performance goals, and measure and report on performancePage 1 GAO/AIMD-00-21.3.1 (11/99)toward those goals. Internal control plays a significant role inhelping managers achieve those goals. Also, the Chief FinancialOfficers Act of 1990 calls for financial management systems tocomply with internal control standards, and the Federal FinancialManagement Improvement Act of 1996 identifies internal control asan integral part of improving financial management systems.Rapid advances in information technology have highlighted theneed for updated internal control guidance related to moderncomputer systems. The management of human capital has gainedrecognition as a significant part of internal control. Furthermore,the private sector has updated its internal control guidance withthe issuance of Internal Control - Integrated Framework, publishedby the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the TreadwayCommission (COSO). Consequently, we have developed this standardsupdate which supersedes our previously issued "Standards forInternal Controls in the Federal Government."This update gives greater recognition to the increasing use ofinformation technology to carry out critical government operations,recognizes the importance of human capital, and incorporates, asappropriate, the relevant updated internal control guidancedeveloped in the private sector. The standards are effectivebeginning with fiscal year 2000 and the Federal Managers FinancialIntegrity Act reports covering that year.We appreciate the efforts of government officials, publicaccounting professionals, and other members of the financialcommunity and academia who provided valuable assistance indeveloping these standards.David M. Walker Comptroller General of the United StatesIntroductionDefinition and ObjectivesThe following definition, objectives, and fundamental conceptsprovide the foundation for the internal control standards.Internal control is a major part of managing an organization. Itcomprises the plans, methods, and procedures used to meet missions,goals, and objectives and, in doing so, supports performance-basedmanagement. Internal control also serves as the first line ofdefense in safeguarding assets and preventing and detecting errorsand fraud. In short, internal control, which is synonymous withmanagement control, helps government program managers achievedesired results through effective stewardship of publicresources.Internal control should provide reasonable assurance that theobjectives of the agency are being achieved in the followingcategories:Effectiveness and efficiency of operations including theuse of the entity's resources.Reliability of financial reporting, including reports onbudget execution, financial statements, and other reports forinternal and external use.Compliance with applicable laws andregulations.A subset of these objectives is the safeguarding of assets.Internal control should be designed to provide reasonable assuranceregarding prevention of or prompt detection of unauthorizedacquisition, use, or disposition of an agency's assets.Fundamental ConceptsThe fundamental concepts provide the underlying framework fordesigning and applying the standards.Internal Control Is a Continuous Built-in Component ofOperationsInternal control is not one event, but a series of actions andactivities that occur throughout an entity's operations and on anongoing basis. Internal control should be recognized as an integralpart of each system that management uses to regulate and guide itsoperations rather than as a separate system within an agency. Inthis sense, internal control is management control that is builtinto the entity as aPage 5 GAO/AIMD-00-21.3.1 (11/99)Internal Control Is Effected by Peoplepart of its infrastructure to help managers run the entity andachieve their aims on an ongoing basis.People are what make internal control work. The responsibilityfor good internal control rests with all managers. Management setsthe objectives, puts the control mechanisms and activities inplace, and monitors and evaluates the control. However, allpersonnel in the organization play important roles in making ithappen.Internal Control Provides Reasonable Assurance, Not AbsoluteAssuranceManagement should design and implement internal control based onthe related cost and benefits. No matter how well designed andoperated, internal control cannot provide absolute assurance thatall agency objectives will be met. Factors outside the control orinfluence of management can affect the entity's ability to achieveall of its goals. For example, human mistakes, judgment errors, andacts of collusion to circumvent control can affect meeting agencyobjectives. Therefore, once in place, internal control providesreasonable, not absolute, assurance of meeting agencyobjectives.Internal Control StandardsPresentation of the StandardsThese standards define the minimum level of quality acceptablefor internal control in government and provide the basis againstwhich internal control is to be evaluated. These standards apply toall aspects of an agency's operations: programmatic, financial, andcompliance. However, they are not intended to limit or interferewith duly granted authority related to developing legislation,rule-making, or other discretionary policy-making in an agency.These standards provide a general framework. In implementing thesestandards, management is responsible for developing the detailedpolicies, procedures, and practices to fit their agency'soperations and to ensure that they are built into and an integralpart of operations.In the following material, each of these standards is presentedin a short, concise statement. Additional information is providedto help managers incorporate the standards into their dailyoperations.Control EnvironmentA positive control environment is the foundation for all otherstandards. It provides discipline and structure as well as theclimate which influences the quality of internal control. Severalkey factors affect the control environment.One factor is the integrity and ethical values maintained anddemonstrated by management and staff. Agency management plays a keyrole in providing leadership in this area, especially in settingand maintaining the organization's ethical tone, providing guidancefor proper behavior, removing temptations for unethical behavior,and providing discipline when appropriate.Another factor is management's commitment to competence. Allpersonnel need to possess and maintain a level of competence thatallows them to accomplish their assigned duties, as well asunderstand the importance of developing and implementing goodinternal control. Management needs to identify appropriateknowledge and skills needed for various jobs and provide neededtraining, as well as candid and constructive counseling, andperformance appraisals.Page 8 GAO/AIMD-00-21.3.1 (11/99)Management's philosophy and operating style also affect theenvironment. This factor determines the degree of risk the agencyis willing to take and management's philosophy towardsperformance-based management. Further, the attitude and philosophyof management toward information systems, accounting, personnelfunctions, monitoring, and audits and evaluations can have aprofound effect on internal control.Another factor affecting the environment is the agency'sorganizational structure. It provides management's framework forplanning, directing, and controlling operations to achieve agencyobjectives. A good internal control environment requires that theagency's organizational structure clearly define key areas ofauthority and responsibility and establish appropriate lines ofreporting.The environment is also affected by the manner in which theagency delegates authority and responsibility throughout theorganization. This delegation covers authority and responsibilityfor operating activities, reporting relationships, andauthorization protocols.Good human capital policies and practices are another criticalenvironmental factor. This includes establishing appropriatepractices for hiring, orienting, training, evaluating, counseling,promoting, compensating, and disciplining personnel. It alsoincludes providing a proper amount of supervision.A final factor affecting the environment is the agency'srelationship with the Congress and central oversight agencies suchas OMB. Congress mandates the programs that agencies undertake andmonitors their progress and central agencies provide policy andguidance on many different matters. In addition,Page 9 GAO/AIMD-00-21.3.1 (11/99)Risk AssessmentInspectors General and internal senior management councils cancontribute to a good overall control environment.A precondition to risk assessment is the establishment of clear,consistent agency objectives. Risk assessment is the identificationand analysis of relevant risks associated with achieving theobjectives, such as those defined in strategic and annualperformance plans developed under the Government Performance andResults Act, and forming a basis for determining how risks shouldbe managed.Management needs to comprehensively identify risks and shouldconsider all significant interactions between the entity and otherparties as well as internal factors at both the entitywide andactivity level. Risk identification methods may include qualitativeand quantitative ranking activities, management conferences,forecasting and strategic planning, and consideration of findingsfrom audits and other assessments.Once risks have been identified, they should be analyzed fortheir possible effect. Risk analysis generally includes estimatingthe risk's significance, assessing the likelihood of itsoccurrence, andPage 10 GAO/AIMD-00-21.3.1 (11/99)Control Activitiesdeciding how to manage the risk and what actions should betaken. The specific risk analysis methodology used can vary byagency because of differences in agencies' missions and thedifficulty in qualitatively and quantitatively assigning risklevels.Because governmental, economic, industry, regulatory, andoperating conditions continually change, mechanisms should beprovided to identify and deal with any special risks prompted bysuch changes.Control activities are the policies, procedures, techniques, andmechanisms that enforce management's directives, such as theprocess of adhering to requirements for budget development andexecution. They help ensure that actions are taken to addressrisks. Control activities are an integral part of an entity'splanning, implementing, reviewing, and accountability forstewardship of government resources and achieving effectiveresults.Control activities occur at all levels and functions of theentity. They include a wide range of diverse activities such asapprovals, authorizations, verifications, reconciliations,performance reviews,Page 11 GAO/AIMD-00-21.3.1 (11/99)Examples of Control Activitiesmaintenance of security, and the creation and maintenance ofrelated records which provide evidence of execution of theseactivities as well as appropriate documentation. Control activitiesmay be applied in a computerized information system environment orthrough manual processes.Activities may be classified by specific control objectives,such as ensuring completeness and accuracy of informationprocessing.There are certain categories of control activities that arecommon to all agencies. Examples include the following:Page 12 GAO/AIMD-00-21.3.1 (11/99)Top Level Reviews of Actual PerformanceReviews by Management at the Functional or Activity LevelManagement of Human CapitalControls Over Information Processing Management should trackmajor agency achievements and compare these to the plans, goals,and objectives established under the Government Performance andResults Act.Managers also need to compare actual performance to planned orexpected results throughout the organization and analyzesignificant differences.Effective management of an organization's workforce-its humancapital-is essential to achieving results and an important part ofinternal control. Management should view human capital as an assetrather than a cost. Only when the right personnel for the job areon board and are provided the right training, tools, structure,incentives, and responsibilities is operational success possible.Management should ensure that skill needs are continually assessedand that the organization is able to obtain a workforce that hasthe required skills that match those necessary to achieveorganizational goals. Training should be aimed at developing andretaining employee skill levels to meet changing organizationalneeds. Qualified and continuous supervision should be provided toensure that internal control objectives are achieved. Performanceevaluation and feedback, supplemented by an effective rewardsystem, should be designed to help employees understand theconnection between their performance and the organization'ssuccess. As a part of its human capital planning, management shouldalso consider how best to retain valuable employees, plan for theireventual succession, and ensure continuity of needed skills andabilities.A variety of control activities are used in informationprocessing. Examples include edit checks of data entered,accounting for transactions in numerical sequences, comparing filetotals with controlPage 13 GAO/AIMD-00-21.3.1 (11/99)Physical Control Over Vulnerable AssetsEstablishment and Review of Performance Measures andIndicatorsSegregation of DutiesProper Execution of Transactions and Events accounts, andcontrolling access to data, files, and programs. Further guidanceon control activities for information processing is provided belowunder "Control Activities Specific for Information Systems."An agency must establish physical control to secure andsafeguard vulnerable assets. Examples include security for andlimited access to assets such as cash, securities, inventories, andequipment which might be vulnerable to risk of loss or unauthorizeduse. Such assets should be periodically counted and compared tocontrol records.Activities need to be established to monitor performancemeasures and indicators. These controls could call for comparisonsand assessments relating different sets of data to one another sothat analyses of the relationships can be made and appropriateactions taken. Controls should also be aimed at validating thepropriety and integrity of both organizational and individualperformance measures and indicators.Key duties and responsibilities need to be divided or segregatedamong different people to reduce the risk of error or fraud. Thisshould include separating the responsibilities for authorizingtransactions, processing and recording them, reviewing thetransactions, and handling any related assets. No one individualshould control all key aspects of a transaction or event.Transactions and other significant events should be authorizedand executed only by persons acting within the scope of theirauthority. This is the principal means of assuring that only validtransactions to exchange, transfer, use, or commit resources andother events are initiated or enteredPage 14 GAO/AIMD-00-21.3.1 (11/99)Accurate and Timely Recording of Transactions and EventsAccess Restrictions to and Accountability for Resources andRecordsAppropriate Documentation of Transactions and Internal Controlinto. Authorizations should be clearly communicated to managers andemployees.Transactions should be promptly recorded to maintain theirrelevance and value to management in controlling operations andmaking decisions. This applies to the entire process or life cycleof a transaction or event from the initiation and authorizationthrough its final classification in summary records. In addition,control activities help to ensure that all transactions arecompletely and accurately recorded.Access to resources and records should be limited to authorizedindividuals, and accountability for their custody and use should beassigned and maintained. Periodic comparison of resources with therecorded accountability should be made to help reduce the risk oferrors, fraud, misuse, or unauthorized alteration.Internal control and all transactions and other significantevents need to be clearly documented, and the documentation shouldbe readily available for examination. The documentation shouldappear in management directives, administrative policies, oroperating manuals and may be in paper or electronic form. Alldocumentation and records should be properly managed andmaintained.These examples are meant only to illustrate the range andvariety of control activities that may be useful to agencymanagers. They are not all-inclusive and may not include particularcontrol activities that an agency may need.Furthermore, an agency's internal control should be flexible toallow agencies to tailor control activities to fit their specialneeds. The specific control activities used by a given agency maybe different from thosePage 15 GAO/AIMD-00-21.3.1 (11/99)Control Activities Specific for Information SystemsGeneral Controlused by others due to a number of factors. These could includespecific threats they face and risks they incur; differences inobjectives; managerial judgment; size and complexity of theorganization; operational environment; sensitivity and value ofdata; and requirements for system reliability, availability, andperformance.There are two broad groupings of information systems control -general control and application control. General control applies toall information systems-mainframe, minicomputer, network, andend-user environments. Application control is designed to cover theprocessing of data within the application software.This category includes entitywide security program planning,management, control over data center operations, system softwareacquisition and maintenance, access security, and applicationsystem development and maintenance. More specifically:Data center and client-server operations controls include backupand recovery procedures, and contingency and disaster planning. Inaddition, data center operations controls also include job set-upand scheduling procedures and controls over operatoractivities.Application ControlSystem software control includes control over theacquisition, implementation, and maintenance of all system softwareincluding the operating system, data-based management systems,telecommunications, security software, and utilityprograms.Access security control protects the systems and networkfrom inappropriate access and unauthorized use by hackers and othertrespassers or inappropriate use by agency personnel. Specificcontrol activities include frequent changes of dial-up numbers; useof dial-back access; restrictions on users to allow access only tosystem functions that they need; software and hardware "firewalls"to restrict access to assets, computers, and networks by externalpersons; and frequent changes of passwords and deactivation offormer employees' passwords.Application system development and maintenance controlprovides the structure for safely developing new systems andmodifying existing systems. Included are documentationrequirements; authorizations for undertaking projects; and reviews,testing, and approvals of development and modification activitiesbefore placing systems into operation. An alternative to in-housedevelopment is the procurement of commercial software, but controlis necessary to ensure that selected software meets the user'sneeds, and that it is properly placed into operation.This category of control is designed to help ensurecompleteness, accuracy, authorization, and validity of alltransactions during application processing. Control should beinstalled at an application's interfaces with other systems toensure that all inputs are received and are valid and outputs arecorrect and properly distributed. An example is computerized editchecks built into the system to review the format, existence, andreasonableness of data.Page 17 GAO/AIMD-00-21.3.1 (11/99)General and application control over computer systems areinterrelated. General control supports the functioning ofapplication control, and both are needed to ensure complete andaccurate information processing. If the general control isinadequate, the application control is unlikely to functionproperly and could be overridden.Because information technology changes rapidly, controls mustevolve to remain effective. Changes in technology and itsapplication to electronic commerce and expanding Internetapplications will change the specific control activities that maybe employed and how they are implemented, but the basicrequirements of control will not have changed. As more powerfulcomputers place more responsibility for data processing in thehands of the end users, the needed controls should be identifiedand implemented.Information and CommunicationsFor an entity to run and control its operations, it must haverelevant, reliable, and timely communications relating to internalas well as external events. Information is needed throughout theagency to achieve all of its objectives.Program managers need both operational and financial data todetermine whether they are meeting their agencies' strategic andannual performance plans and meeting their goals for accountabilityfor effective and efficient use of resources. For example,operating information is required for development of financialreports. This covers a broad range of data from purchases,subsidies, and other transactions to data on fixed assets,inventories, and receivables. Operating information is also neededto determine whether the agency is achieving its compliancerequirements under various laws and regulations. Financialinformation is needed for both external and internal uses. It isrequired to develop financial statements for periodic externalreporting, and, on a day-to-day basis, to make operating decisions,montinor performance, and allocate resources. Pertinent informationshould be identified, captured, and distributed in a form and timeframe that permits people to perform their duties efficiently.Effective communications should occur in a broad sense withinformation flowing down, across, and up the organization. Inadditional to internal communications, management should ensurethere are adequate means of communicating with, and obtaininginformation from, external stakeholders that may have a significantimpact on the agency achieving its goals. Moreover, effectiveinformation technology management is critical to achieving useful,reliable, and continuous recording and communication ofinformation.MonitoringInternal control should generally be designed to assure thatongoing monitoring occurs in the course of normal operations. It isperformed continually and is ingrained in the agency's operations.It includes regular management and supervisory activities,comparisons, reconciliations, and other actions people take inperforming their duties.Separate evaluations of control can also be useful by focusingdirectly on the controls' effectiveness at a specific time. Thescope and frequency of separate evaluations should depend primarilyon the assessment of risks and the effectiveness of ongoingmonitoring procedures. Separate evaluations may take the form ofself-assessments as well as review of control design and directtesting of internal control. Separate evaluations also may beperformed by the agency Inspector General or an external auditor.Deficiencies found during ongoing monitoring or through separateevaluations should be communicated to the individual responsiblefor the function and also to at least one level of management abovethat individual. Serious matters should be reported to topmanagement.Monitoring of internal control should include policies andprocedures for ensuring that the findings of audits and otherreviews are promptly resolved. Managers are to (1) promptlyevaluate findings fromPage 20 GAO/AIMD-00-21.3.1 (11/99)audits and other reviews, including those showing deficienciesand recommendations reported by auditors and others who evaluateagencies' operations, (2) determine proper actions in response tofindings and recommendations from audits and reviews, and (3)complete, within established time frames, all actions that corrector otherwise resolve the matters brought to management's attention.The resolution process begins when audit or other review resultsare reported to management, and is completed only after action hasbeen taken that (1) corrects identified deficiencies, (2) producesimprovements, or(3) demonstrates the findings and recommendationsdo not warrantmanagement action.Ordering InformationThe first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free.Additional copies are $2 each. Orders should be sent to thefollowing address, accompanied by a check or money order made outto the Superintendent of Documents, when necessary. VISA andMasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or morecopies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25percent.Orders by mail:U.S. General Accounting OfficeP.O. Box 37050Washington, DC 20013or visit:Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th & G Sts. NW)U.S. General Accounting OfficeWashington, DCOrders may also be placed by calling (202) 512-6000 or by usingfax number (202) 512-6061, or TDD (202) 512-2537.Each day, GAO issues a list of newly available reports andtestimony. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or anylist from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using atouchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how toobtain these lists.For information on how to access GAO reports on the INTERNET,send an e-mail message with "info" in the body to:info@www.gao.govor visit GAO's World Wide Web Home Page at:http://www.gao.govUnited States General Accounting Office Washington, D.C.20548-0001Official Business Penalty for Private Use $300Address Correction RequestedBulk Rate Postage & Fees Paid GAO Permit No. G100