SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATESNos. 99-603 and 99-960LEGAL SERVICES CORPORATION, PETITIONER 99-603 v. CARMENVELAZQUEZ ET AL.UNITED STATES, PETITIONER 99-960 v. CARMEN VELAZQUEZ ET AL.ON WRITS OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FORTHE SECOND CIRCUIT[February 28, 2001]JUSTICE KENNEDY delivered the opinion of the Court.In 1974, Congress enacted the Legal Services Corporation Act, 88Stat. 378, 42 U. S. C. 2996 et seq. The Act establishes the LegalServices Corporation (LSC) as a District of Columbia nonprofitcorporation. LSC's mission is to distribute funds appropriated byCongress to eligible local grantee organizations "for the purposeof providing financial support for legal assistance in noncriminalproceedings or matters to persons financially unable to affordlegal assistance." 2996b(a).LSC grantees consist of hundreds of local organizationsgoverned, in the typical case, by local boards of directors. Inmany instances the grantees are funded by a combination of LSCfunds and other public or private sources. The granteeorganizations hire and supervise lawyers to provide free legalassistance to indigent clients. Each year2 LEGAL SERVICES CORPORATION v. VELAZQUEZLSC appropriates funds to grantees or recipients that hire andsupervise lawyers for various professional activities, includingrepresentation of indigent clients seeking welfare benefits.This suit requires us to decide whether one of the conditionsimposed by Congress on the use of LSC funds violates the FirstAmendment rights of LSC grantees and their clients. For purposes ofour decision, the restriction, to be quoted in further detail,prohibits legal representation funded by recipients of LSC moneysif the representation involves an effort to amend or otherwisechallenge existing welfare law. As interpreted by the LSC and bythe Government, the restriction prevents an attorney from arguingto a court that a state statute conflicts with a federal statute orthat either a state or federal statute by its terms or in itsapplication is violative of the United States Constitution.Lawyers employed by New York City LSC grantees, together withprivate LSC contributors, LSC indigent clients, and various stateand local public officials whose governments contribute to LSCgrantees, brought suit in the United States District Court for theSouthern District of New York to declare the restriction, amongother provisions of the Act, invalid. The United States Court ofAppeals for the Second Circuit approved an injunction againstenforcement of the provision as an impermissible viewpoint-baseddiscrimination in violation of the First Amendment, 164 F. 3d 757(1999). We granted certiorari, and the parties who commenced thesuit in the District Court are here as respondents. The LSC aspetitioner is joined by the Government of the United States, whichhad intervened in the District Court. We agree that the restrictionviolates the First Amendment, and we affirm the judgment of theCourt of Appeals.I From the inception of the LSC, Congress has placedrestrictions on its use of funds. For instance, the LSC Actprohibits recipients from making available LSC funds, programpersonnel, or equipment to any political party, to any politicalcampaign, or for use in "advocating or opposing any ballotmeasures." 42 U. S. C. 2996e(d)(4). See 2996e(d)(3). The Actfurther proscribes use of funds in most criminal proceedings and inlitigation involving nontherapeutic abortions, secondary schooldesegregation, military desertion, or violations of the SelectiveService statute. 2996f(b)(8)-(10) (1994 ed. and Supp. III). Fundrecipients are barred from bringing class-action suits unlessexpress approval is obtained from LSC. 2996e(d)(5). Therestrictions at issue were part of a compromise set of restrictionsenacted in the Omnibus Consolidated Rescissions and AppropriationsAct of 1996 (1996 Act), 504, 110 Stat. 1321-53, and continued ineach subsequent annual appropriations Act. The relevant portion of504(a)(16) prohibits funding of any organization "that initiateslegal representation or participates in any other way, inlitigation, lobbying, or rulemaking, involving an effort to reforma Federal or State welfare system, except that this paragraph shallnot be construed to preclude a recipient from representing anindividual eligible client who is seeking specific relief from awelfare agency if such relief does not involve an effort to amendor otherwise challenge existing law in effect on the date of theinitiation of the representation."The prohibitions apply to all of the activities of an LSCgrantee, including those paid for by non-LSC funds. 504(d)(1) and(2). We are concerned with the statutory provision which excludesLSC representation in casesLEGAL SERVICES CORPORATION v. VELAZQUEZOpinion of the Courtwhich "involve an effort to amend or otherwise challengeexisting law in effect on the date of the initiation of therepresentation."In 1997, LSC adopted final regulations clarifying 504(a)(16).45 CFR pt. 1639 (1999). LSC interpreted the statutory provision toallow indigent clients to challenge welfare agency determinationsof benefit ineligibility under interpretations of existing law. Forexample, an LSC grantee could represent a welfare claimant whoargued that an agency made an erroneous factual determination orthat an agency misread or misapplied a term contained in anexisting welfare statute. According to LSC, a grantee in thatposition could argue as well that an agency policy violatedexisting law. 1639.4. Under LSC's interpretation, however,grantees could not accept representations designed to changewelfare laws, much less argue against the constitutionality orstatutory validity of those laws. Brief for Petitioner in No.99-603, p. 7. Even in cases where constitutional or statutorychallenges became apparent after representation was well under way,LSC advised that its attorneys must withdraw. Ibid.After the instant suit was filed in the District Court allegingthe restrictions on the use of LSC funds violated the FirstAmendment, see 985 F. Supp. 323 (1997), the court denied apreliminary injunction, finding no probability of success on themerits. Id., at 344.On appeal, the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit affirmedin part and reversed in part. 164 F. 3d 757 (1999). As relevant forour purposes, the court addressed respondents' challenges to therestrictions in 504(a)(16). It concluded the section specifiedfour categories of prohibited activities, of which "threeappear[ed] to prohibit the type of activity named regardless ofviewpoint, while one might be read to prohibit the activity onlywhen it seeks reform." Id., at 768. The court upheld therestrictions on litigation, lobbying, and rulemaking "involving aneffort to reform a Federal or State welfare system," since allthree prohibited grantees' involvement in these activitiesregardless of the side of the issue. Id., at 768-769.The court next considered the exception to 504(a)(16) thatallows representation of "'an individual eligible client who isseeking specific relief from a welfare agency.'" The courtinvalidated, as impermissible viewpoint discrimination, thequalification that representation could "not involve an effort toamend or otherwise challenge existing law," because it "clearlyseeks to discourage challenges to the status quo." Id., at769-770.Left to decide what part of the 1996 Act to strike as invalid,the court concluded that congressional intent regardingseverability was unclear. It decided to "invalidate the smallestpossible portion of the statute, excising only the viewpoint-basedproviso rather than the entire exception of which it is a part."Id., at 773.Dissenting in part, Judge Jacobs agreed with the majority exceptfor its holding that the proviso banning challenges to existingwelfare laws effected impermissible viewpoint-based discrimination.The provision, in his view, was permissible because it merelydefined the scope of services to be funded. Id., at 773-778(opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part).LSC filed a petition for certiorari challenging the Court ofAppeals' conclusion that the 504(a)(16) suits-for-benefits provisowas unconstitutional. We granted certiorari, 529 U. S. 1052(2000).II The United States and LSC rely on Rust v. Sullivan, 500U. S. 173 (1991), as support for the LSC program restrictions.In Rust, Congress established program clinics to provide subsidiesfor doctors to advise patients on a variety of family planningtopics. Congress did not consider abortion to be within its familyplanning objectives, how6 LEGAL SERVICES CORPORATION v. VELAZQUEZever, and it forbade doctors employed by the program fromdiscussing abortion with their patients. Id., at 179-180.Recipients of funds under Title X of the Public Health Service Act,1002, 1008, as added, 84 Stat. 1506, 42U. S. C. 1508, 300a, 300a-6, challenged the Act's restrictionthat provided that none of the Title X funds appropriated forfamily planning services could "be used in programs where abortionis a method of family planning." 300a-6. The recipients arguedthat the regulations constituted impermissible viewpointdiscrimination favoring an antiabortion position over a proabortionapproach in the sphere of family planning. 500 U. S., at 192. Theyasserted as well that Congress had imposed an unconstitutionalcondition on recipients of federal funds by requiring them torelinquish their right to engage in abortion advocacy andcounseling in exchange for the subsidy. Id., at 196.We upheld the law, reasoning that Congress had not discriminatedagainst viewpoints on abortion, but had "merely chosen to fund oneactivity to the exclusion of the other." Id., at 193. Therestrictions were considered necessary "to ensure that the limitsof the federal program [were] observed." Ibid. Title X did notsingle out a particular idea for suppression because it wasdangerous or disfavored; rather, Congress prohibited Title Xdoctors from counseling that was outside the scope of the project.Id., at 194-195.The Court in Rust did not place explicit reliance on therationale that the counseling activities of the doctors under TitleX amounted to governmental speech; when interpreting the holding inlater cases, however, we have explained Rust on this understanding.We have said that viewpoint-based funding decisions can besustained in instances in which the government is itself thespeaker, see Board of Regents of Univ. of Wis. System v.Southworth, 529 U. S. 217, 229, 235 (2000), or instances, likeRust, inOpinion of the Courtwhich the government "used private speakers to transmitinformation pertaining to its own program." Rosenbergerv. Rector & Visitors of Univ. of Va., 515 U. S. 819, 833(1995). As we said in Rosenberger, "[w]hen the government disbursespublic funds to private entities to convey a governmental message,it may take legitimate and appropriate steps to ensure that itsmessage is neither garbled nor distorted by the grantee." Ibid. Thelatitude which may exist for restrictions on speech where thegovern-ment's own message is being delivered flows in part from ourobservation that, "[w]hen the government speaks, for instance topromote its own policies or to advance a particular idea, it is, inthe end, accountable to the electorate and the political processfor its advocacy. If the citizenry objects, newly elected officialslater could espouse some different or contrary position." Board ofRegents of Univ. of Wis. System v. Southworth, supra, at 235.Neither the latitude for government speech nor its rationaleapplies to subsidies for private speech in every instance, however.As we have pointed out, "[i]t does not follow . . . thatviewpoint-based restrictions are proper when the [government] doesnot itself speak or subsidize transmittal of a message it favorsbut instead expends funds to encourage a diversity of views fromprivate speakers." Rosenberger, supra, at 834.Although the LSC program differs from the program at issue inRosenberger in that its purpose is not to "encourage a diversity ofviews," the salient point is that, like the program in Rosenberger,the LSC program was designed to facilitate private speech, not topromote a governmental message. Congress funded LSC grantees toprovide attorneys to represent the interests of indigent clients.In the specific context of 504(a)(16) suits for benefits, anLSCfunded attorney speaks on the behalf of the client in a claimagainst the government for welfare benefits. The lawyer is not thegovernment's speaker. The attorney8 LEGAL SERVICES CORPORATION v. VELAZQUEZdefending the decision to deny benefits will deliver thegovernment's message in the litigation. The LSC lawyer, however,speaks on the behalf of his or her private, indigent client. Cf.Polk County v. Dodson, 454 U. S. 312, 321-322 (1981) (holding thata public defender does not act "under color of state law" becausehe "works under canons of professional responsibility that mandatehis exercise of independent judgment on behalf of the client" andbecause there is an "assumption that counsel will be free of statecontrol").The Government has designed this program to use the legalprofession and the established Judiciary of the States and theFederal Government to accomplish its end of assisting welfareclaimants in determination or receipt of their benefits. The advicefrom the attorney to the client and the advocacy by the attorney tothe courts cannot be classified as governmental speech even under agenerous understanding of the concept. In this vital respect thissuit is distinguishable from Rust.The private nature of the speech involved here, and the extentof LSC's regulation of private expression, are indicated further bythe circumstance that the Government seeks to use an existingmedium of expression and to control it, in a class of cases, inways which distort its usual functioning. Where the government usesor attempts to regulate a particular medium, we have been informedby its accepted usage in determining whether a particularrestriction on speech is necessary for the pro-gram's purposes andlimitations. In FCC v. League of Women Voters of Cal., 468 U. S.364 (1984), the Court was instructed by its understanding of thedynamics of the broadcast industry in holding that prohibitionsagainst editorializing by public radio networks were animpermissible restriction, even though the Government enacted therestriction to control the use of public funds. The First Amendmentforbade the Government from using theOpinion of the Courtforum in an unconventional way to suppress speech inherent inthe nature of the medium. See id., at 396-397. In Arkansas Ed.Television Comm'n v. Forbes, 523 U. S. 666, 676 (1998), thedynamics of the broadcasting system gave station programmers theright to use editorial judgment to exclude certain speech so thatthe broadcast message could be more effective. And in Rosenberger,the fact that student newspapers expressed many different points ofview was an important foundation for the Court's decision toinvalidate viewpoint-based restrictions. 515 U. S., at 836.When the government creates a limited forum for speech, certainrestrictions may be necessary to define the limits and purposes ofthe program. Perry Ed. Assn. v. Perry Local Educator's Assn., 460U. S. 37 (1983); see also Lamb's Chapel v. Center Moriches UnionFree School Dist., 508 U. S. 384 (1993). The same is true when thegovernment establishes a subsidy for specified ends. Rust v.Sullivan, 500 U. S. 173 (1991). As this suit involves a subsidy,limited forum cases such as Perry, Lamb's Chapel and Rosenbergermay not be controlling in a strict sense, yet they do provide someinstruction. Here the program presumes that private,nongovernmental speech is necessary, and a substantial restrictionis placed upon that speech. At oral argument and in its briefs theLSC advised us that lawyers funded in the Government program maynot undertake representation in suits for benefits if they mustadvise clients respecting the questionable validity of a statutewhich defines benefit eligibility and the payment structure. Thelimitation forecloses advice or legal assistance to question thevalidity of statutes under the Constitution of the United States.It extends further, it must be noted, so that state statutesinconsistent with federal law under the Supremacy Clause may beneither challenged nor questioned.By providing subsidies to LSC, the Government seeks to10 LEGAL SERVICES CORPORATION v. VELAZQUEZfacilitate suits for benefits by using the State and Federalcourts and the independent bar on which those courts depend for theproper performance of their duties and responsibilities.Restricting LSC attorneys in advising their clients and inpresenting arguments and analyses to the courts distorts the legalsystem by altering the traditional role of the attorneys in muchthe same way broadcast systems or student publication networks werechanged in the limited forum cases we have cited. Just asgovernment in those cases could not elect to use a broadcastingnetwork or a college publication structure in a regime whichprohibits speech necessary to the proper functioning of thosesystems, see Arkansas Ed. Television Comm'n, supra, andRosenberger, supra, it may not design a subsidy to effect thisserious and fundamental restriction on advocacy of attorneys andthe functioning of the judiciary.LSC has advised us, furthermore, that upon determining aquestion of statutory validity is present in any anticipated orpending case or controversy, the LSC-funded attorney must cease therepresentation at once. This is true whether the validity issuebecomes apparent during initial attorney-client consultations or inthe midst of litigation proceedings. A disturbing example of therestriction was discussed during oral argument before the Court. Itis well understood that when there are two reasonable constructionsfor a statute, yet one raises a constitutional question, the Courtshould prefer the interpretation which avoids the constitutionalissue. Gomez v. United States, 490 U. S. 858, 864 (1989); Ashwanderv. TVA, 297 U. S. 288, 346-348 (1936) (Brandeis, J., concurring).Yet, as the LSC advised the Court, if, during litigation, a judgewere to ask an LSC attorney whether there was a constitutionalconcern, the LSC attorney simply could not answer. Tr. of Oral Arg.8-9.Interpretation of the law and the Constitution is the primarymission of the judiciary when it acts within the sphere of itsauthority to resolve a case or controversy. Marbury v. Madison, 1Cranch 137, 177 (1803) ("It is emphatically the province and theduty of the judicial department to say what the law is"). Aninformed, independent judiciary presumes an informed, independentbar. Under 504(a)(16), however, cases would be presented by LSCattorneys who could not advise the courts of serious questions ofstatutory validity. The disability is inconsistent with theproposition that attorneys should present all the reasonable andwell-grounded arguments necessary for proper resolution of thecase. By seeking to prohibit the analysis of certain legal issuesand to truncate presentation to the courts, the enactment underreview prohibits speech and expression upon which courts mustdepend for the proper exercise of the judicial power. Congresscannot wrest the law from the Constitution which is its source."Those then who controvert the principle that the constitution isto be considered, in court, as a paramount law, are reduced to thenecessity of maintaining that courts must close their eyes on theconstitution, and see only the law." Id., at 178.The restriction imposed by the statute here threatens severeimpairment of the judicial function. Section 504(a)(16) sifts outcases presenting constitutional challenges in order to insulate theGovernment's laws from judicial inquiry. If the restriction onspeech and legal advice were to stand, the result would be twotiers of cases. In cases where LSC counsel were attorneys ofrecord, there would be lingering doubt whether the truncatedrepresentation had resulted in complete analysis of the case, fulladvice to the client, and proper presentation to the court. Thecourts and the public would come to question the adequacy andfairness of professional representations when the attorney, eitherconsciously to comply with this statute or unconsciously tocontinue the repreLEGAL SERVICES CORPORATION v. VELAZQUEZOpinion of the Courtsentation despite the statute, avoided all reference toquestions of statutory validity and constitutional authority. Ascheme so inconsistent with accepted separation-of-powersprinciples is an insufficient basis to sustain or uphold therestriction on speech.It is no answer to say the restriction on speech is harmlessbecause, under LSC's interpretation of the Act, its attorneys canwithdraw. This misses the point. The statute is an attempt to drawlines around the LSC program to exclude from litigation thosearguments and theories Congress finds unacceptable but which bytheir nature are within the province of the courts to consider.The restriction on speech is even more problematic because incases where the attorney withdraws from a representation, theclient is unlikely to find other counsel. The explicit premise forproviding LSC attorneys is the necessity to make availablerepresentation "to persons financially unable to afford legalassistance." 42 U. S. C. 2996(a)(3). There often will be noalternative source for the client to receive vital informationrespecting constitutional and statutory rights bearing upon claimedbenefits. Thus, with respect to the litigation services Congresshas funded, there is no alternative channel for expression of theadvocacy Congress seeks to restrict. This is in stark contrast toRust. There, a patient could receive the approved Title X familyplanning counseling funded by the Government and later couldconsult an affiliate or independent organization to receiveabortion counseling. Unlike indigent clients who seek LSCrepresentation, the patient in Rust was not required to forfeit theGovern-ment-funded advice when she also received abortioncounseling through alternative channels. Because LSC attorneys mustwithdraw whenever a question of a welfare statute's validityarises, an individual could not obtain joint representation so thatthe constitutional challenge would be presented by a non-LSCattorney, and other, 504(a)(16) is necessary to define the scopeand contours of the federal program, a condition that ensures fundscan be spent for those cases most immediate to congressionalconcern. In support of this contention, they suggest the challengedlimitation takes into account the nature of the grantees'activities and provides limited congressional funds for theprovision of simple suits for benefits. In petitioners' view, therestriction operates neither to maintain the current welfare systemnor insulate it from attack; rather, it helps the current welfaresystem function in a more efficient and fair manner by removingfrom the program complex challenges to existing welfare laws.The effect of the restriction, however, is to prohibit advice orargumentation that existing welfare laws are unconstitutional orunlawful. Congress cannot recast a condition on funding as a meredefinition of its program in every case, lest the First Amendmentbe reduced to a simple semantic exercise. Here, notwithstandingCongress' purpose to confine and limit its program, the restrictionoperates to insulate current welfare laws from constitutionalscrutiny and certain other legal challenges, a conditionimplicating central First Amendment concerns. In no lawsuit fundedby the Government can the LSC attorney, speaking on behalf of aprivate client, challenge existing welfare laws. As a result,arguments by indigent clients that a welfare statute is unlawful orunconstitutional cannot be expressed in this Government-fundedprogram for petitioning the courts, even though the program wascreated for litigation involving welfare benefits, and even thoughthe ordinary course of litigation involves the expression oftheories and postulates on both, or multiple, sides of anissue.It is fundamental that the First Amendment "was fashioned toassure unfettered interchange of ideas for the14 LEGAL SERVICES CORPORATION v. VELAZQUEZbringing about of political and social changes desired by thepeople." New York Times Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U. S. 254, 269 (1964)(quoting Roth v. United States, 354 U. S. 476, 484 (1957)). Therecan be little doubt that the LSC Act funds constitutionallyprotected expression; and in the context of this statute there isno programmatic message of the kind recognized in Rust and whichsufficed there to allow the Government to specify the advice deemednecessary for its legitimate objectives. This serves to distinguish504(a)(16) from any of the Title X program restrictions upheld inRust, and to place it beyond any congressional funding conditionapproved in the past by this Court.Congress was not required to fund an LSC attorney to representindigent clients; and when it did so, it was not required to fundthe whole range of legal representations or relationships. The LSCand the United States, however, in effect ask us to permit Congressto define the scope of the litigation it funds to exclude certainvital theories and ideas. The attempted restriction is designed toinsulate the Government's interpretation of the Constitution fromjudicial challenge. The Constitution does not permit the Governmentto confine litigants and their attorneys in this manner. We must bevigilant when Congress imposes rules and conditions which in effectinsulate its own laws from legitimate judicial challenge. Whereprivate speech is involved, even Congress' antecedent fundingdecision cannot be aimed at the suppression of ideas thoughtinimical to the Government's own interest. Regan v. Taxation WithRepresentation of Wash., 461U. S. 540, 548 (1983); Speiser v. Randall, 357 U. S. 513, 519(1958).For the reasons we have set forth, the funding condition isinvalid. The Court of Appeals considered whether the languagerestricting LSC attorneys could be severed from the statute so thatthe remaining portions would remain operative. It reached thereasoned conclusion to invaliOpinion of the Courtdate the fragment of 504(a)(16) found contrary to the FirstAmendment, leaving the balance of the statute operative and inplace. That determination was not discussed in the briefs of eitherparty or otherwise contested here, and in the exercise of ourdiscretion and prudential judgment we decline to address it.The judgment of the Court of Appeals isAffirmed.