SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATESNos. 99-603 and 99-960LEGAL SERVICES CORPORATION, PETITIONER 99-603 v. CARMENVELAZQUEZ ET AL.UNITED STATES, PETITIONER 99-960 v. CARMEN VELAZQUEZ ET AL.ON WRITS OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FORTHE SECOND CIRCUIT[February 28, 2001]JUSTICE SCALIA, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE, JUSTICE O'CONNOR,and JUSTICE THOMAS join, dissenting.Section 504(a)(16) of the Omnibus Consolidated Rescissions andAppropriations Act of 1996 (Appropriations Act) defines the scopeof a federal spending program. It does not directly regulatespeech, and it neither establishes a public forum nor discriminateson the basis of viewpoint. The Court agrees with all this, yetapplies a novel and unsupportable interpretation of ourpublic-forum precedents to declare 504(a)(16) faciallyunconstitutional. This holding not only has no foundation in ourjurisprudence; it is flatly contradicted by a recent decision thatis on all fours with the present case. Having found the limitationupon the spending program unconstitutional, the Court then declinesto consider the question of severability, allowing a judgment tostand that lets the program go forward under a version of thestatute Congress never enacted. I respectfully dissent from bothaspects of the judgment.I The Legal Services Corporation Act of 1974 (LSC Act), 42 U. S.C. 2996 et seq., is a federal subsidy program, the stated purposeof which is to "provid[e] financial support for legal assistance innoncriminal proceedings or matters to persons financially unable toafford legal assistance." 2996b(a). Congress, recognizing that theprogram could not serve its purpose unless it was "kept free fromthe influence of or use by it of political pressures," 2996(5),has from the program's inception tightly regulated the use of itsfunds. See ante, at 3. No Legal Services Corporation (LSC) fundsmay be used, for example, for "encouraging . . . labor or antilaboractivities," 2996f(b)(6), for "litigation relating to thedesegregation of any elementary or secondary school or schoolsystem," 2996f(b)(9), or for "litigation which seeks to procure anontherapeutic abortion," 2996f(b)(8). Congress discovered throughexperience, however, that these restrictions did not exhaust thepolitically controversial uses to which LSC funds could be put.Accordingly, in 1996 Congress added new restrictions to the LSC Actand strengthened existing restrictions. Among the new restrictionsis the one at issue here. Section 504(a)(16) of the AppropriationsAct, 110 Stat. 1321- 55 to 1321-56, withholds LSC funds from everyentity that "participates in any . . . way . . . in litigation,lobbying, or rulemaking . . . involving an effort to reform aFederal or State welfare system." It thus bans LSC-funded entitiesfrom participating on either side of litigation involving suchstatutes, from participating in rulemaking relating to theimplementation of such legislation, and from lobbying Congressitself regarding any proposed changes to such legislation. See 45CFR 1639.3 (2000). The restrictions relating to rulemaking andlobbying are superfluous; they duplicate general prohibitions onthe use of LSC funds for those activities found elsewhere intheAppropriations Act. See 504(a)(2), (3), (4). The restrictionon litigation, however, is unique, and it contains a provisospecifying what the restriction does not cover. Funding recipientsmay "represen[t] an individual eligible client who is seekingspecific relief from a welfare agency if such relief does notinvolve an effort to amend or otherwise challenge existing law ineffect on the date of the initiation of the representation." TheLSC declares in its brief, and respondents do not deny, that underthese provisions the LSC can sponsor neither challenges to nordefenses of existing welfare reform law, Brief for Petitioner inNo. 99-603, p. 29. The litigation ban is symmetrical: Litigantschallenging the covered statutes or regulations do not receive LSCfunding, and neither do litigants defending those laws againstchallenge.If a suit for benefits raises a claim outside the scope of theLSC program, the LSC-funded lawyer may not participate in the suit.As the Court explains, if LSC-funded lawyers anticipate that aforbidden claim will arise in a prospective client's suit, they"may not undertake [the] representation," ante, at 9. Likewise, ifa forbidden claim arises unexpectedly at trial, "LSC-fundedattorney[s] must cease the representation at once," ante, at 10.See also Brief for Petitioner in No. 99-603, at 7, n. 4 (if theissue arises at trial, "the lawyer should discontinue therepresentation 'consistent with the applicable rules ofprofessional responsibility'"). The lawyers may, however, andindeed must explain to the client why they cannot represent him.See 164 F. 3d 757, 765 (CA2 1999). They are also free to expresstheir views of the legality of the welfare law to the client, andthey may refer the client to another attorney who can accept therepresentation, ibid. See 985 F. Supp 323, 335-336 (EDNY 1997).II The LSC Act is a federal subsidy program, not a federalregulatory program, and "[t]here is a basic difference between[the two]." Maher v. Roe, 432 U. S. 464, 475 (1977). Regulationsdirectly restrict speech; subsidies do not. Subsidies, it is true,may indirectly abridge speech, but only if the funding scheme is"'manipulated' to have a 'coercive effect'" on those who do nothold the subsidized position. National Endowment for Arts v.Finley, 524 U. S. 569, 587 (1998) (quoting Arkansas Writers'Project, Inc. v. Ragland, 481 U. S. 221, 237 (1987) (SCALIA, J.,dissenting)). Proving unconstitutional coercion is difficult enoughwhen the spending program has universal coverage and excludes onlycertain speech- such as a tax exemption scheme excluding lobbyingexpenses. The Court has found such programs unconstitutional onlywhen the exclusion was "aimed at the suppression of dangerousideas." Speiser v. Randall, 357 U. S. 513, 519 (1958) (internalquotation marks omitted); see also Regan v. Taxation WithRepresentation of Wash., 461 U. S. 540, 550 (1983). Proving therequisite coercion is harder still when a spending program is notuniversal but limited, providing benefits to a restricted number ofrecipients, see Rust v. Sullivan, 500 U. S. 173, 194-195 (1991).The Court has found such selective spending unconstitutionallycoercive only once, when the government created a public forum withthe spending program but then discriminated in distributing fundingwithin the forum on the basis of viewpoint. See Rosenberger v.Rector and Visitors of Univ. of Va., 515 U. S. 819, 829-830 (1995).When the limited spending program does not create a public forum,proving coercion is virtually impossible, because simply denying asubsidy "does not 'coerce' belief," Lyng v. Automobile Workers, 485U. S. 360, 369 (1988), and because the criterion ofunconstitutionality is whether denial of the subsidy threatens "todrive certain ideas or viewpoints from the marketplace," NationalEndowment for Arts v. Finley, supra, at 587 (internal quotationmarks omitted). Absent such a threat, "the Government may allocate. . . funding according to criteria that would be impermissiblewere direct regulation of speech or a criminal penalty at stake."524 U. S., at 587-588.In Rust v. Sullivan, supra, the Court applied these principlesto a statutory scheme that is in all relevant respectsindistinguishable from 504(a)(16). The statute in Rust authorizedgrants for the provision of family planning services, but providedthat "[n]one of the funds . . . shall be used in programs whereabortion is a method of family planning." Id., at 178. Validregulations implementing the statute required funding recipients torefer pregnant clients "for appropriate prenatal . . . services byfurnishing a list of available providers that promote the welfareof mother and unborn child," but forbade them to refer a pregnantwoman specifically to an abortion provider, even upon request. Id.,at 180. We rejected a First Amendment free-speech challenge to thefunding scheme, explaining that "[t]he Government can, withoutviolating the Constitution, selectively fund a program to encouragecertain activities it believes to be in the public interest,without at the same time funding an alternative program which seeksto deal with the problem another way." Id., at 193. This was not,we said, the type of "discriminat[ion] on the basis of viewpoint"that triggers strict scrutiny, ibid., because the "'decision not tosubsidize the exercise of a fundamental right does not infringe theright,'" ibid. (quoting Regan v. Taxation With Representation ofWash., supra, at 549).The same is true here. The LSC Act, like the scheme in Rust, see500 U. S., at 200, does not create a public forum. Far fromencouraging a diversity of views, it has always, as the Courtaccurately states, "placed restrictions on its use of funds," ante,at 3. Nor does 504(a)(16) discriminate on the basis of viewpoint,since it funds neither challenges to nor defenses of existingwelfare law. The provision simply declines to subsidize a certainclass of litigation, and under Rust that decision "does notinfringe the right" to bring such litigation. Cf. Ortwein v.Schwab, 410 U. S. 656, 658-660, and n. 5 (1973) (per curiam)(government not required by First Amendment or Due Process Clauseto waive filing fee for welfare benefits litigation). The Court'srepeated claims that 504(a)(16) "restricts" and "prohibits"speech, see, e.g., ante, at 10, 11, and "insulates" laws fromjudicial review, see, e.g., ante, at 13, are simply baseless. Nolitigant who, in the absence of LSC funding, would bring a suitchallenging existing welfare law is deterred from doing so by504(a)(16). Rust thus controls these cases and compels theconclusion that 504(a)(16) is constitutional.The Court contends that Rust is different because the program atissue subsidized government speech, while the LSC funds privatespeech. See ante, at 7-8. This is so unpersuasive it hardly needsresponse. If the private doctors' confidential advice to theirpatients at issue in Rust constituted "government speech," it ishard to imagine what subsidized speech would not be governmentspeech. Moreover, the majority's contention that the subsidizedspeech in these cases is not government speech because the lawyershave a professional obligation to represent the interests of theirclients founders on the reality that the doctors in Rust had aprofessional obligation to serve the interests of their patients,see 500 U. S., at 214 (Blackmun, J., dissenting) ("ethicalresponsibilities of the medical profession")- which at the time ofRust we had held to be highly relevant to the permissible scope offederal regulation, see Thornburgh v. American College ofObstetricians and Gynecologists, 476 U. S. 747, 763 (1986)("professional responsibilities" of physicians), overruled in parton other grounds, Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pa. v. Casey,505 U. S. 833 (1992). Even respondents agree that "the true speakerin Rust was not the government, but a doctor." Brief forRespondents 19, n. 17.SCALIA, J., dissentingThe Court further asserts that these cases are different fromRust because the welfare funding restriction "seeks to use anexisting medium of expression and to control it . . . in ways whichdistort its usual functioning," ante, at 8. This is wrong on boththe facts and the law. It is wrong on the law because there isutterly no precedent for the novel and facially implausibleproposition that the First Amendment has anything to do withgovernment funding that- though it does not actually abridgeanyone's speech- "distorts an existing medium of expression." Noneof the three cases cited by the Court mentions such an oddprinciple. In Rosenberger v. Rector and Visitors of Univ. of Va.,the point critical to the Court's analysis was not, as the Courtwould have it, that it is part of the "usual functioning" ofstudent newspapers to "expres[s] many different points of view,"ante, at 9 (it surely is not), but rather that the spending programitself had been created "to encourage a diversity of views fromprivate speakers," 515U. S., at 834. What could not be distorted was the public forumthat the spending program had created. As for Arkansas Ed.Television Comm'n v. Forbes, 523 U. S. 666 (1998), that casediscussed the nature of television broadcasting, not to determinewhether government regulation would alter its "usual functioning"and thus violate the First Amendment (no government regulation waseven at issue in the case), but rather to determine whetherstate-owned television is a "public forum" under our FirstAmendment jurisprudence. Id., at 673-674. And finally, the passagethe Court cites from FCC v. League of Women Voters of Cal., 468 U.S. 364, 396-397 (1984), says nothing whatever about "using theforum [of public radio] in an unconventional way to suppress speechinherent in the nature of the medium," ante, at 8-9. It discusseswhy the Government's asserted interest in "preventing [publicradio] stations from becoming a privileged outlet for the politicaland ideological opinions of station owners and managers," 468 U.S., at 396 (internal quotation marks omitted), was insubstantialand thus could not justify the statute's restriction oneditorializing. Even worse for the Court, after invalidating therestriction on this conventional First Amendment ground, League ofWomen Voters goes on to say that "[o]f course," the restriction oneditorializing "would plainly be valid" if "Congress were to adopta revised version of [the statute] that permitted [public radio]stations to establish 'affiliate' organizations which could thenuse the station's facilities to editorialize with nonfederalfunds." Id., at 400. But of course that is the case here.Regulations permit funding recipients to establish affiliateorganizations to conduct litigation and other activities that falloutside the scope of the LSC program. See 45 CFR pt. 1610 (2000).Far from supporting the Court's nondistortion analysis, League ofWomen Voters dooms the Court's case.The Court's "nondistortion" principle is also wrong on thefacts, since there is no basis for believing that 504(a)(16), bycausing "cases [to] be presented by LSC attorneys who [can]notadvise the courts of serious questions of statutory validity,"ante, at 11, will distort the operation of the courts. It may wellbe that the bar of 504(a)(16) will cause LSC-funded attorneys todecline or to withdraw from cases that involve statutory validity.But that means at most that fewer statutory challenges to welfarelaws will be presented to the courts because of the unavailabilityof free legal services for that purpose. So what? The same resultwould ensue from excluding LSCfunded lawyers from welfarelitigation entirely. It is not the mandated, nondistortablefunction of the courts to inquire into all "serious questions ofstatutory validity" in all cases. Courts must consider only thosequestions of statutory validity that are presented by litigants,and if the Government chooses not to subsidize the presentation ofsome such questions, that in no way "distorts" the courts' role. Itis remarkable that a Court that has so studiously avoided decidingwhether Congress could entirely eliminate federal jurisdiction overcertain matters, see, e.g., Webster v. Doe, 486 U. S. 592, 603(1988); Bowen v. Michigan Academy of Family Physicians, 476 U. S.667, 681,n. 12 (1986), would be so eager to hold the much lesser step ofdeclining to subsidize the litigation unconstitutional under theFirst Amendment.Nor will the judicial opinions produced by LSC casessystematically distort the interpretation of welfare laws. Judicialdecisions do not stand as binding "precedent" for points that werenot raised, not argued, and hence not analyzed. See, e.g., UnitedStates v. Verdugo-Urquidez, 494U. S. 259, 272 (1990); Hagans v. Lavine, 415 U. S. 528,533,n. 5 (1974); United States v. L. A. Tucker Truck Lines, Inc.,344 U. S. 33, 37-38 (1952); United States v. More, 3 Cranch 159,172 (1805) (Marshall, C. J.). The statutory validity that courtsassume in LSC cases will remain open for full determination inlater cases.Finally, the Court is troubled "because in cases where theattorney withdraws from a representation, the client is unlikely tofind other counsel." Ante, at 12. That is surely irrelevant, sinceit leaves the welfare recipient in no worse condition than he wouldhave been in had the LSC program never been enacted. Respondentsproperly concede that even if welfare claimants cannot obtain alawyer anywhere else, the Government is not required to provideone. Brief for Respondents 16; accord, Goldberg v. Kelly, 397 U. S.254, 270 (1970) (government not required to provide counsel athearing regarding termination of welfare benefits). It is hard tosee how providing free legal services to some welfare claimants(those whose claims do not challenge the applicable statutes) whilenot providing it to others is beyond the range of legitimatelegislative choice. Rust rejected a similar argument:"Petitioners contend, however, that most Title X cliSCALIA, J., dissentingents are effectively precluded by indigency and poverty fromseeing a health-care provider who will provide abortion-relatedservices. But once again, even these Title X clients are in noworse position than if Congress had never enacted Title X. Thefinancial constraints that restrict an indigent woman's ability toenjoy the full range of constitutionally protected freedom ofchoice are the product not of governmental restrictions on accessto abortion, but rather of her indigency." 500 U. S., at 203(internal quotation marks omitted).The only conceivable argument that can be made fordistinguishing Rust is that there even patients who wished toreceive abortion counseling could receive the nonabortion servicesthat the Government-funded clinic offered, whereas here somepotential LSC clients who wish to receive representation on abenefits claim that does not challenge the statutes will be unableto do so because their cases raise a reform claim that an LSClawyer may not present. This difference, of course, is required bythe same ethical canons that the Court elsewhere does not wish todistort. Rather than sponsor "truncated representation," ante, at11, Congress chose to subsidize only those cases in which theattorneys it subsidized could work freely. See, e.g., 42 U. S. C.2996(6) ("[A]ttorneys providing legal assistance must have fullfreedom to protect the best interests of their clients"). And it isimpossible to see how this difference from Rust has any bearingupon the First Amendment question, which, to repeat, is whether thefunding scheme is "'manipulated' to have a 'coercive effect'" onthose who do not hold the subsidized position. National Endowmentfor Arts v. Finley, 524 U. S., at 587 (quoting Arkansas Writers'Project, Inc. v. Ragland, 481 U. S., at 237 (SCALIA, J.,dissenting)). It could be claimed to have such an effect if theclient in a case ineligible for LSC representation could eliminatethe ineligibility by waiving the claim that the statute is invalid;but he cannot. No conceivable coercive effect exists.This has been a very long discussion to make a point that isembarrassingly simple: The LSC subsidy neither prevents anyone fromspeaking nor coerces anyone to change speech, and isindistinguishable in all relevant respects from the subsidy upheldin Rust v. Sullivan, supra. There is no legitimate basis fordeclaring 504(a)(16) facially unconstitutional.IIIEven were I to accept the Court's First Amendment analysis, Icould not join its decision to conclude this litigation withoutreaching the issue of severability. That issue, although decided bythe Second Circuit, was not included within the question on whichcertiorari was granted, and, as the Court points out, was notbriefed or argued here. I nonetheless think it an abuse ofdiscretion to ignore it.The Court has said that "[w]e may consider questions outside thescope of the limited order [granting certiorari] when resolution ofthose questions is necessary for the proper disposition of thecase." Piper Aircraft Co. v. Reyno, 454 U. S. 235, 246-247, n. 12(1981). I think it necessary to a "proper disposition" here becausethe statute concocted by the Court of Appeals bears littleresemblance to what Congress enacted, funding without restrictionwelfare-benefits litigation that Congress funded only under thelimitations of 504(a)(16). Although no party briefed severabilityin Denver Area Ed. Telecommunications Consortium, Inc. v. FCC, 518U. S. 727 (1996), the Justices finding partial unconstitutionalityconsidered it necessary to address the issue. Id., at 767(plurality opinion) ("[W]e must ask whether 10(a) is severable");accord, New York v. United States, 505 U. S. 144, 186 (1992). Ithink we have that same obligation here. Moreover, by exercisingour "discretion" to leave the severability question open, we failto resolve the basic, realworld dispute at issue: whether LSCattorneys may represent welfare claimants who challenge theapplicable welfare laws. Indeed, we leave the LSC program subjectto even a greater uncertainty than the one we purport to haveeliminated, since other circuits may conclude (as I do) that if thelimitation upon welfare representation is unconstitutional, LSCattorneys cannot engage in welfare litigation at all."The inquiry into whether a statute is severable is essentiallyan inquiry into legislative intent." Minnesota v. Mille Lacs Bandof Chippewa Indians, 526 U. S. 172, 191 (1999). If Congress "wouldnot have enacted those provisions which are within its power,independently of that which is not," then courts must strike theprovisions as a piece. Alaska Airlines, Inc. v. Brock, 480 U. S.678, 684 (1987) (internal quotation marks omitted). One determineswhat Congress would have done by examining what it did. Perhaps themost that can be said on the subject is contained in a passagewritten by Chief Justice Shaw of the Supreme Judicial Court ofMassachusetts that we have often quoted:"[I]f [a statute's provisions] are so mutually connected withand dependent on each other, as conditions, considerations orcompensations for each other, as to warrant a belief that thelegislature intended them as a whole, and that, if all could not becarried into effect, the legislature would not pass the residueindependently, and some parts are unconstitutional, all theprovisions which as thus dependent, conditional or connected, mustfall with them." Warren v. Mayor and Aldermen of Charlestown, 68Mass. 84, 99 (1854).It is clear to me that the LSC Act's funding of welfare benefitssuits and its prohibition on suits challenging or defending thevalidity of existing law are "conditions, considerations [and]compensations for each other" that cannot be severed. Congressthrough the LSC Act intended "to provide high quality legalassistance to those who would be otherwise unable to affordadequate legal counsel," 42 U. S. C. 2996(2), but only if theprogram could at the same time "be kept free from the influence ofor use by it of political pressures," 2996(5). More than a dozentimes in 504(a) Congress made the decision that certain activitiescould not be funded at all without crippling the LSC program withpolitical pressures. See, e.g., 504(a)(1) (reapportionmentlitigation); 504(a)(4) (local, state, and federal lobbying);504(a)(7) (class action lawsuits); 504(a)(12) (training programsfor, inter alia, boycotts, picketing, and demonstrations);504(a)(14) (litigation with respect to abortion). The severabilityquestion here is, essentially, whether, without the restrictionthat the Court today invalidates, the permission for conductingwelfare litigation would have been accorded. As far as appears fromthe best evidence (which is the structure of the statute), I thinkthe answer must be no.We have in some cases stated that when an "excepting proviso isfound unconstitutional the substantive provisions which itqualifies cannot stand," for "to hold otherwise would be to extendthe scope of the law . . . so as to embrace [situations] which thelegislature passing the statute had, by its very terms, expresslyexcluded." Frostv. Corporation Comm'n of Okla., 278 U. S. 515, 525 (1929); seealso Davis v. Wallace, 257 U. S. 478, 484 (1922) ("Where anexcepting provision in a statute is found unconstitutional, courtsvery generally hold that this does not work an enlargement of thescope or operation of other provisions with which that provisionwas enacted, and which it was intended to qualify or restrain"). Ifrankly doubt whether this approach has been followed consistentlyenough to be called the "general" rule, but if there were ever aninstance in which it is appropriate it is here. To strike therestriction on welfare benefits suits is to void 504(a)(16)altogether. Subsection (a)(16) prohibits involvement in three typesof activities with respect to welfare reform: lobbying, rulemaking,and litigation. But the proscriptions against using LSC funds toparticipate in welfare lobbying and rulemaking are superfluous,since as described above subsections (a)(2), (a)(3), and (a)(4) of504 withhold LSC funds from those activities generally. What isunique about subsection (a)(16)- the only thing it achieves- is itslimit on litigation. To remove that limit is to repeal subsection(a)(16) altogether, and thus to eliminate a significant quid proquo of the legislative compromise. We have no authority to "rewrite[the] statute and give it an effect altogether different" from whatCongress agreed to. Railroad Retirement Bd. v. Alton R. Co.,295U. S. 330, 362 (1935) (quoted in Carter v. Carter Coal Co., 298U. S. 238, 313 (1936)).*** It is illuminating to speculate how these cases would havebeen decided if Congress had enacted 504(a)(16) without itsproviso (prescribing only the general ban against "litigation,lobbying, or rulemaking, involving an effort to reform a Federal orState welfare system"), and if the positions of the parties beforeus here were reversed. If the LSC-funded lawyers were here arguingthat the statute permitted representation of individual welfareclaimants who did not challenge existing law, I venture to say thatthe Court would endorse their argument- perhaps with stirringlanguage about the importance of aid to welfare applicants and theCourt's unwillingness to presume without clear indication thatCongress would want to eliminate it. And I have little doubt thatin that contextSCALIA, J., dissentingthe Court would find its current First Amendment musings asunpersuasive as I find them today.Today's decision is quite simply inexplicable on the basis ofour prior law. The only difference between Rust and the presentcase is that the former involved "distortion" of (that is to say,refusal to subsidize) the normal work of doctors, and the latterinvolves "distortion" of (that is to say, refusal to subsidize) thenormal work of lawyers. The Court's decision displays not only animproper special solicitude for our own profession; it alsodisplays, I think, the very fondness for "reform through thecourts"- the making of innumerable social judgments throughjudgepronounced constitutional imperatives- that prompted Congressto restrict publicly funded litigation of this sort. The Court saystoday, through an unprecedented (and indeed previously rejected)interpretation of the First Amendment, that we will not allow thisrestriction- and then, to add insult to injury, permits to stand ajudgment that awards the general litigation funding that thestatute does not contain. I respectfully dissent.