Comptroller Generalof the United States United States General Accounting OfficeWashington, DC 20548B-287944August 17, 2001The Vice President of the United StatesDear Mr. Vice President:Pursuant to 31 U.S.C.  716(b), I am submitting this reportbecause the Vice President, as Chair of the National Energy PolicyDevelopment Group (NEPDG), has not provided the General AccountingOffice (GAO) with access to certain records relating to the processby which the National Energy Policy was developed. I requestedthese records in writing on July 18, 2001, in accordance withsection 716. Despite repeated attempts, we have been unable toresolve this dispute.The Vice President and his representatives have asserted thatGAO lacks the statutory authority to examine the activities of theNEPDG, recognizing only GAOs authority to audit its financialtransactions. They have also asserted that our examination wouldunconstitutionally interfere with the functioning of the executivebranch. In addition to the arguments previously advanced by theVice Presidents representatives and addressed in our June 22letter to the Counsel to the Vice President (see Enclosure 1), theVice Presidents August 2 letter to the Congress asserts that thestudy is not authorized by statute because GAO is limited tolooking at the results of programs and that GAO does not have aright of access to documents because the Vice President is notincluded under the term agency used in GAOs statute.As discussed below, we strongly disagree with the VicePresidents positions. Disclosing the records we are seeking wouldnot reveal communications between the President and his advisersand would not unconstitutionally interfere with the functioning ofthe executive branch. Furthermore, GAO has ample authority toconduct this review, and this authority has been recognized byvarious presidential administrations for many years. Finally,neither the plain meaning of the statute nor the legislativehistory supports the Vice Presidents interpretation of the termsresults and agency.The GAO as an institution, and the Comptroller General as anofficer of the legislative branch, assist the Congress inexercising its responsibilities under the Constitution to oversee,investigate, and legislate. In order to help members of Congresscarry out their role and evaluate the process used to develop theNational Energy Policy, GAO needs selected factual andnon-deliberative records that the Vice President, as Chair of theNEPDG, or others representing the Group, are in a position toprovide GAO. The records we are requesting will assist the reviewof how the NEPDG spent public funds, how it carried out itsactivities, and whether applicable law was followed.1 Descriptionsof the records we are requesting, our efforts to obtain them, andour statutory authorities are summarized below.Description of Records RequestedIn May 2001, the Comptroller General authorized this GAO studybased on a request from Representatives John D. Dingell and HenryA. Waxman, Ranking Minority Members of the House Committee onEnergy and Commerce and the House Committee on Government Reform,respectively. Our study is narrowly focused to answer the question,What process did the NEPDG use to develop the National EnergyPolicy? To answer that question, we have requested documents thatprovide the following information:Who was present at each of the group meetings conductedby the NEPDG?What are the names of the professional staff assigned toprovide support to NEPDG?Who did each of the members of the NEPDG (including theVice President as Chair) and its support staff meet with to gatherinformation for the National Energy Policy, including the date,subject, and location of the meetings?What direct and indirect costs were incurred indeveloping the National Energy Policy?In communications with the Vice Presidents Counsel prior to theAugust 2 letter, we offered to eliminate our earlier request forminutes and notes and for the information presented by members ofthe public. Even though we are legally entitled to thisinformation, as a matter of comity, we are scaling back the recordswe are requesting to exclude these two items of information.2Furthermore, we have repeatedly emphasized that we are flexible inhow information is provided to GAO. Despite these and other effortson our part to resolve the impasse, the Vice Presidentsrepresentatives have shown no interest in reaching anyaccommodation.1For example, the information on who was present at each of thegroup meetings conducted by the NEPDG can be used to confirm thatonly full-time officers or employees of the federal governmentattended the meetings and thus rule out the possibility that theFederal Advisory Committee Act (FACA) is applicable to meetings ofthe group. FACA exempts from its provisions those committeescomposed wholly of full-time federal officers or employees.Similarly, information on whom individual NEPDG members and staffmet with and the dates and subjects of the meetings would berelevant in confirming that meetings with members of the public didnot trigger FACA. 5 U.S.C. app. 2 (2000).2These items of information are described in paragraph 3(d) and(e), and paragraph 4(d) and(e) of our letter of July 18, 2001.Efforts to Obtain RecordsGAO began its efforts to conduct this review on May 7 byfollowing our standard practice of calling a designated contact toset up an initial meeting with NEPDG staff. (See Enclosure 2 for achronology of our efforts to obtain the records.) Numerous phonecalls did not produce a meeting date. Instead, on May 16, the VicePresidents Counsel sent GAO a letter questioning theappropriateness of GAOs review, expressing reluctance to supplythe information requested and asking for a statement of GAOs legalauthority to conduct the review. We responded on June 1 that therequest was consistent with our authorities and asked for access torecords containing the information requested.On June 7, the Vice Presidents Counsel again questioned GAOsauthority to conduct this review, and in our June 22 reply weexplained our statutory authorities in detail. We also repeated ourrequest for information relevant to our study. Subsequent to ourJune 22 letter, GAO officials have engaged in numerousconversations with the Vice Presidents representatives. However,in these conversations, the Vice Presidents representatives havefocused entirely on their view that GAO lacks authority to conductthis review, rather than on reaching an accommodation.On July 18, 2001, the Comptroller General issued a letter to theVice President in his capacity as Chair of the NEPDG, under 31U.S.C.  716(b), requesting access to certain records relating toour study, restating our authority for inspecting the records, andthe reason for our inspection.3 The Vice President did not respondto GAO with a description of the records withheld and the reasonsfor withholding them as required by the statute. Instead, he sentletters to the House of Representatives and the Senate on August 2,2001, to inform them of GAOs actions and to serve as a response toGAOs July 18 letter. In these letters, he asserted that Iexceeded my lawful authority by undertaking this study. He alsorefused to acknowledge GAOs basic statutory authorities andasserts that if the Comptroller Generals misconstruction of thestatutes were to prevail, his conduct would unconstitutionallyinterfere with the functioning of the Executive Branch.When records are not made available to GAO within a reasonabletime, the provisions of 31 U.S.C.  716(b) establish mechanisms forresolution of GAO access-to-records problems. Section 716(b)(1)provides that when GAO is not given access to records within areasonable time, the Comptroller General may make a written requestfor such records to the agency head. The official then has 20 daysto respond and the response is required to describe the recordwithheld and the reason the record is being withheld. If GAO is notgiven an opportunity to inspect the record during this time period,the Comptroller General may file a report to the President, theCongress, and other executive branch officials. Twenty days afterfiling the report, the Comptroller General may bring a civil actionin the district court of the United States for the District ofColumbia to require the official involved to produce the withheldrecords.As this letter makes clear, as Comptroller General of the UnitedStates, I have broad discretion to conduct audits, investigations,and examinations of executive branch activities either at therequest of Congress or on my own authority. Furthermore, we do notagree that disclosure of the limited factual and non-deliberativeinformation we are seeking, such as the names of participants atmeetings, would unconstitutionally interfere with the functioningof the executive branch. In support of this proposition, the VicePresidents August 2 letter states that preservation of theability of the executive branch to function effectively requiresrespecting the confidentiality of communications among a President,a Vice President, the Presidents other senior advisers andothers. However, as we have made clear in several discussions withthe Vice Presidents representatives, we are not asking for anycommunications involving the President, the Vice President, or thePresidents senior advisers. We are simply asking for facts thatthe Vice President, as Chair of the NEPDG, or others representingthe group, would be in a position to provide to GAO. These includethe names of attendees, dates and locations, and the subjects ofthe meetings.The Vice President has also expressed concern regarding certainrequests for his personal schedule. We understand and appreciatethe Vice Presidents concerns regarding release of his personalschedule. As a result, we have made clear to the Vice Presidentsrepresentatives that we are not seeking a copy of his calendar orinformation on meetings held other than in his capacity as Chair ofthe NEPDG. As we have emphasized, we are seeking certain factualinformation on meetings the Vice President held in his capacity asChair of the Group.Although the Vice President did not use the term ExecutivePrivilege in his August 2 letter, his assertion that providingthese facts would unconstitutionally interfere with the executivebranch and his focus on confidentiality of communications use thesame language and reasoning as assertions of Executive Privilege.4In our view, the information that GAO seeks is not protected byExecutive Privilege. As noted above, the information we are seekingis factual and non-deliberative in nature. In fact, the VicePresidents Counsel has already informed the House Committee onEnergy and Commerce and the House Committee on Government Reform,that the meetings the support staff and other NEPDG members hadwere to gather information relevant to the NEPDGs work and werenot deliberative inThe right to invoke Executive Privilege rests with thePresident, and Presidents have had different procedures forasserting it. President Reagan, for example, required the agencyhead, if a substantial question was raised, to notify and consultwith the Attorney General and the White House Counsels Office. ThePresident would decide whether to assert the privilege. PresidentClinton modified President Reagans policy by requiring the agencyhead to directly notify the White House Counsel. The White HouseCounsel was to seek an accommodation, and if unsuccessful, toconsult with the Attorney General. Again, the President determinedwhether to invoke the privilege.5nature. Even where the President has made a formal claim ofExecutive Privilege, which is not the case here, federal courtshave held that the executive and legislative branches have a dutyto attempt to reach a mutual accommodation.6 As we have statedearlier, the Vice Presidents representatives have declined todiscuss reaching any accommodation.The information we are seeking is of the type that has beencommonly provided to GAO for many years spanning severaladministrations. Furthermore, in prior GAO reviews of workinggroups established by the President, we have received informationon participation by outside parties. Most recently, GAO reviewedactivities of the White House China Trade Relations Working Group,which was established at the request of President Clinton in theexercise of his Constitutional powers. In this review, GAO wasprovided thousands of documents including copies of e-mails andother information identifying group members contacts with outsidegroups and individuals. Previously, at the request of theRepublican Ranking Minority Member of the House Committee onGovernment Operations, GAO reviewed activities of PresidentClintons Task Force on Health Care Reform and was provided with anextensive listing of working group participants drawn from thegovernment and from outside organizations. Moreover, some membersof the NEPDG have already provided us with information identical inkind to the type of information we are seeking from the VicePresident in his capacity as Chair of the NEPDG and from NEPDGstaff members. For example, the Secretaries of Energy and Interiorand the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, haveprovided us with information concerning who they met with todevelop the National Energy Policy, when the meetings occurred,where they occurred, and what the general topics were.GAOs Basic Audit AuthorityGAOs basic authority stems from the Budget and Accounting Actof 1921, which, as discussed below, provides GAO with broad andcomprehensive authority to investigate all matters relating to theuse of public money. Succeeding legislation affecting GAOsauthority has generally served to emphasize the role of review andanalysis by GAO as a means of enhancing congressional oversightover activities of the executive branch.7 The5Letter from David S. Addington, Counsel to the Vice President,to the House Committee on Energy and Commerce and the HouseCommittee on Government Reform (May 4, 2001). The letter enclosedthe responses of the Executive Director of the NEPDG to a letterdated April 19, 2001, from the Ranking Minority Members of the twocommittees.6See, e.g., United States v. American Telephone and TelegraphCo., 567 F. 2d 121 (D.C. Cir. 1977).7As the principal legislative history accompanying the GeneralAccounting Office Act of 1980 explains, With the growth in thenumber of Federal programs and agencies, the Congress has bynecessity become more dependent on GAO assistance in fulfilling itsoversight and legislative responsibilities. GAO not only providesCongress with essential information about Federal programs, butalso, uniquely, exercises statutory authority to(continued)GAO, headed by the Comptroller General, is a principal means bywhich the legislative branch conducts oversight of executiveprograms and activities.8Notwithstanding the broad authority vested in GAO and theComptroller General by the Congress, the Vice Presidents August 2letter again questioned GAOs basic authority to do this review.However, as we explained in our June 22, 2001, letter to theCounsel to the Vice President, our inquiry is authorized by 31U.S.C.  712 and 717. Section 712(1) authorizes GAO to investigate"all matters related to the receipt, disbursement, and use ofpublic money," and there is no doubt that public money was used tofund the activities of the NEPDG. The Counsel has asserted thatsection 712(1) limits GAO's audit authority to financialtransactions. As we explained in our June 22 letter, the Counselsnarrow interpretation of section 712 is inconsistent with thelanguage and legislative history of the statute, as well as yearsof GAO practice. The statute extends GAOs audit authority to allmatters related to the use of public money, not just costs ofactivities.Section 717(b) also clearly authorizes this study. It providesthat the Comptroller General "shall evaluate the results of aprogram or activity the Government carries out under existing law."The Counsels assertion that the phrase existing law is limitedto statutes and excludes the Constitution is unsupported. As weexplained in our June 22 letter, the Counsel failed to supply anyevidence from the statutory language, legislative history, or caselaw to support the assertion that Congress intended the phrase"existing law" to exclude the Constitution, the highest law of theland.The Vice Presidents August 2 letter noted that section 717authorizes GAO to review the results of agency programs andactivities and stated that "the Comptroller General is notevaluating the 'results' of the Group's work; he is attempting toinquire into the process by which the results of the Group's workwere reached." In effect, the August 2 letter suggests that section717 does not provide GAO with authority to review the processes anagency follows in establishing or implementing a program oractivity. We strongly disagree with this view.The Presidential Memorandum establishing the NEPDG provided thatone of the results of this action would be the gathering ofinformation relevant to a national energy policy. Thus, themeetings that are the focus of our review were the result of agovernmental activitythe establishment of the NEPDG. The NEPDGcarried out many activities, the results of which are subject toevaluation by GAO under the plain meaning of the statute. However,the Vice Presidents August 2 letter in effect interprets resultsas being restricted to end results or ultimate results. Underthis narrow construction of the statute, GAO would beprohibited(continued)participate directly in the oversight process as an independentcongressional entity. S. Rep. No. 96-570, at 2 (1979), reprintedin 1980 U.S.C.C.A.N. 732, 733.8 Id. at 1.from scrutinizing any agency activity except the final programresult. Thus, even if GAO were able to identify certaindeficiencies in a land management plan, for example, GAO would beprohibited from examining the process used to develop the plan inorder to suggest improvements. This would clearly be contrary tothe role that Congress has established for GAO.There is no indication in section 717 or its legislative historythat Congress intended to take such a narrow view of GAOsauthority. In fact, GAO has long interpreted its audit authority asencompassing reviews of agency processes. This position, which hasnot been challenged by any prior administration, is reflected inthe many congressional requests we receive to review agencyprocesses for a broad variety of activities. Several recentexamples include GAOs review of the process the Forest Serviceused to modify the Tongass National Forest plan,9 the process usedby NASA to contract for the design and delivery of theinternational space station propulsion module,10 and the processused by the Army Corps of Engineers in preparing an environmentalimpact statement for actions related to the Snake River dams.11The legislative history of the Legislative Reorganization Act of1970, which enacted the authority now contained in section 717(b),supports a broad interpretation of GAOs authority. The objectivewas to enhance GAOs role of review and analysis, as part of alarger effort to fortify congressional oversight by mak[ing] moreinformation available to Members and Committees of the Congress,andprovid[ing] them a means of interpreting the information theyhave.12 Clearly it would have been contrary to the overall thrustof the Act for Congress to exclude from GAOs purview agencyprocesses and activities that are routinely the subject ofcongressional oversight.13 Accordingly, it is unreasonable toconclude that by using the term results in section 717, Congressintended to limit and restrict GAOs review authority to simplyreviewing end results. Moreover, in any event,9Tongass National Forest: Process Used to Modify the Forest Plan,GAO/RCED-00-45 April 17, 2000.10International Space Station Propulsion Module ProcurementProcess, GAO-01-576R, April 26, 2001.11Army Corps of Engineers: An Assessment of the DraftEnvironmental Impact Statement of the Lower Snake River Dams,GAO/RCED-00-186, July 24, 2000.12H.R. Rep. No. 91-1215, at 12-13, reprinted in 1970 U.S.C.C.A.N.4417, 4428.13There is no question that Congress has expansive oversightpowers with respect to agency processes and activities. NumerousSupreme Court precedents recognize a broad and encompassing powerin Congress to engage in oversight and investigation. Thus, inEastlandv. United States Servicemen's Fund, 421 U.S. 491, 504 n. 15(1975), the Court stated that the scope of Congress power ofinquiry is as penetrating and far-reaching as the potential powerto enact and appropriate under the Constitution.section 712 grants GAO broad authority to investigate allmatters related to the use of public money and necessarily includesthe agency processes in implementing programs.14While generally asserting that GAO lacks authority to do thisreview, the Vice President has acknowledged GAOs authority in onearea, agreeing that we can look into the direct and indirectexpenses of the NEPDG under section 712. To this end, on June 21,his representatives provided us with 77 pages of miscellaneousdocuments purporting to relate to direct and indirect costsincurred in the development of the National Energy Policy. As wehave advised the Vice Presidents representatives, the submissionis incomplete and is not fully responsive. Moreover, it isvirtually impossible to analyze the documentation.15 We cannot do ameaningful review without an explanation of the nature and purposesof these costs and the appropriation that was charged. Thus far, wehave sought to obtain adequate, relevant records and explanationswithout success.GAOs Statutory Right of AccessThe Vice President in his August 2 letter also asserts that theterm agency in 31 U.S.C.  716 does not include the VicePresident because he is a constitutional officer of the government.However, as noted above, we are requesting records from the VicePresident in his capacity as Chair of the NEPDG. The Vice Presidentprovides no support for interpreting the term agency in Title 31as excluding the NEPDG. Title 31 defines an agency subject toGAOs authority very expansively, to mean a department, agency, orinstrumentality of the United States government, but not thelegislative branch or the Supreme Court. As broadly as the termagency is now defined, the statutory language before thecodification of Title 31 in 1982 emphasizes its expansiveness.Before the codification, the relevant term was department orestablishment, defined in 31 U.S.C.  2 (1976) to include anyexecutive department, independent commission, board, bureau,office, agency, or other establishment of the Government. Giventhe breadth of the statutory language, the NEPDG as chaired by theVice President is clearly an agency under Title 31 of the UnitedStates Code.The legislative history of the General Accounting Office Act of1980, which amended GAOs access statute (now 31 U.S.C.  716) toauthorize GAO to enforce its right of access to agency records,made it abundantly clear that Congress viewed the President andhis14See Enclosure 1, pp. 3-5, for a fuller discussion.15For example, some pages provided are simply numbers or dollaramounts without an indication of the nature or purpose associatedwith the amount or consist only of a drawing of cell or deskphones. Others have multiple charges for moving phones or otherequipment, without identifying whether the moves were for NEPDGstaff, and which of the multiple charges are relevant to the moves.In addition, there is nothing that identifies the support staff andthe White House Fellow, referred to as the group support staff,assigned to provide support to the NEPDG.closest advisers as being within GAOs access authority andsubject to access enforcement actions. A key purpose of the 1980Act was to strengthen GAOs ability to obtain access to records inthe face of opposition by agencies including the White House. Theprincipal legislative history accompanying the Act16 chronicled thedifferent access problems GAO had encountered in obtaining recordsto which it was legally entitled, including serious access torecords difficulties at the White House. These included an auditthat required GAO to obtain unemployment estimates from the Councilof Economic Advisers.17The Senate report accompanying the 1980 Act explicitlyrecognized that the President and his principal advisers andassistants are within the scope of GAOs access rights andenforcement authority.18 In order to accommodate executive branchconcerns about the extent to which GAO could judicially compeldisclosure of highly sensitive information, Congress added thecertification mechanism. This enables the President and theDirector of the Office and Management and Budget (OMB) to precludea suit by the Comptroller General under certain specialconditions.19 As the Senate report explained:[W]ith regard to enforcement actions at the Presidential level,certifications provided for under section 102(d)(3) [now section716(d)(1)(C)] are intended to authorize the President and theDirector of the Office of Management and Budget to preclude a suitby the Comptroller General against the President and his principaladvisers and assistants, and against those units within theExecutive Office of the President whose sole function is to adviseand assist the President, for information which would not beavailable under the Freedom of Information Act.2016S. Rep. No. 96-570, reprinted in 1980 U.S.C.C.A.N. 732.17The Justice Department ultimately conceded that the Council ofEconomic Advisors was subject to GAOs access authority andprovided the records. In this regard, during hearings that predatedthe 1980 Act, the Deputy Assistant Attorney General of the Officeof Legal Counsel testified, [T]he long and the short of it is thatvirtually every piece of information that was requested waseventually provided and it was provided because the AttorneyGeneral said this is what we think the law requires. GAOLegislation: Hearings before the Subcomm. on Energy, NuclearProliferation, and Federal Services of the Senate Comm. onGovernmental Affairs, 96th Cong. 78 (1979).18S. Rep. No. 96-570, at 8, reprinted in 1980 U.S.C.C.A.N. at739.19The certification provision, now contained in 31 U.S.C. 716(d)(1)(C), precludes a suit by the Comptroller General if thePresident or Director of OMB certifies that (1) the records couldbe withheld under either of two Freedom of Information Actexemptions in 5 U.S.C.  552(b)(5)(deliberative process) and 5U.S.C.  552(b)(7)(law enforcement records) and (2) disclosurecould reasonably be expected to impair substantially the operationof the government.20S. Rep. No. 96-570, at 8, reprinted in 1980 U.S.C.C.A.N. at739.Thus, it is clear that Congress crafted the certificationprovision as a carefully balanced compromise that ensures thePresident can protect the confidentiality of highly sensitiveinformation, the disclosure of which would substantially impair theoperations of government, while affording the Comptroller Generalthe access to information he needs to fulfill his responsibilitiesunder the law. Congress would not have needed to add thecertification provision to protect the presidential advisers iftheir records were not within the scope of GAOs accessauthority.Submission of ReportSince GAO has a legal right of access to the requested documentsand since full access was not provided within 20 days following ourJuly 18 letter pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 716(b)(1), I now submit thisreport to you and the other designated officials. Unless anexemption under section 716(d)(1) is invoked, such as certificationby the President or Director of OMB, I am authorized to bring acivil action for judicial enforcement of our access request if fulland complete access to the records we are requesting is notprovided to GAO within 20 days following the filing of thisreport.I seek your assistance in resolving this matter in a timelymanner. We are hopeful that this pending access problem can beresolved expeditiously, without litigation, and in a manner thatwill allow us to fulfill our oversight and reportingresponsibilities to the Congress. If you or your representativeshave any questions or would like to meet to resolve this issue,please contact me at (202) 512-5500 or Anthony Gamboa, GeneralCounsel, at (202) 5125400.Thank you for your time and attention to this importantmatter.Respectfully yours,(signed)David M. Walker Comptroller General of the United StatesEnclosure 1 June 22, 2001 letter from the General Counsel of GAOto the Counsel for theVice President Enclosure 2 Chronology of GAOs Attempts toObtain Information