1. INTRODUCTIONIn recent years, considerable attention has focused onincreasing competition in the provision of postal services. Thereasoning is that competitive pressure brings about productiveefficiency, efficient price structures, product innovation, and theelimination of economic rents. Postal administrations, however, areoften under constraints that limit their ability to respond to suchpressure.Consider the United States Postal Service. It is constrained bylaws and regulations formulated by Congress over more than twocenturies. This political process focused as much on socialconsiderations as on the kinds of market forces that shapecompetitive outcomes. And once made, provisions have tended toremain. These observations apply, though in somewhat altered form,even since the1 Presented at the Conference on Postal and Delivery Economics,The Center for Research in Regulated Industries at RutgersUniversity, Vancouver, Canada, June 710, 2000 2 The writer isSpecial Assistant to the Postal Rate Commission, an independentregulatory agency of the United States Government. The viewsexpressed herein are his own and do not necessarily represent thoseof the Commission or any of its members. Correspondence may be sentto rmit@iname.com.Postal Reorganization Act of 1970. Specifically, that Act turnedrate making over to an independent Postal Rate Commission, but italso specified a range of factors to which the Commission must giveweight and it required that certain classification structures ofthe past be honored.3This paper focuses on changes the United States Postal Servicewould make if it had the freedom to position itself to withstandcompetition in all of its markets. (Crew 1995) After suchadjustment, it might become a sustainable monopoly. If thisoccurred, the Service's configuration would be that of a successfulcompetitor and, at the same time, any benefits from having oneprovider would be retained. These benefits include economies ofscale and joint production. No changes of any kind are advocated.Note that the extent of any changes that would be made is a measureof the extent of non-market choices that have been allowed by theprotection currently provided.Creating a competitive environment would involve, at a minimum,eliminating the Private Express Statutes4 and the mailbox rule.5Absent these, some portions of the mail stream would attract3 As discussed below, it required continuation of 5 preferredsubclasses. 4 These statutes are laws that comprise the letter mailmonopoly. 5 The mailbox rule specifies that no one other than thePostal Service (and the addressee) may put mail into the box. Thisrule is part of the United States Criminal Code. No other countryhas such a rule. Note that eliminating the rule is not a simplechange and has a downside. In particular: 1) The Postal Serviceitself owns and maintains many of the boxes-specifically thoseknown as "cluster" boxes. 2) Many owners of boxes, particularlythose in apartment complexes and those secured by locks, do notwant to open them to all parties. 3) The ability of the PostalInspection Service, or similar replacement agency, to control mailfraud would bethe attention of competitors. The Postal Service would sufferfinancial losses. This could lead to a spiral of rate increases andfurther volume losses.The Postal Service would be better off if it lowered selectedrates and took back some of the lost volume. If it did this, someof its new competitors would be driven out of business, causingboth investor losses and charges that the government should not becompeting with private enterprise. Such a scenario is notdesirable. A much better approach would be to allow the PostalService to make adjustments first.Accordingly, the setting of this paper is that all protectionwill be removed and that the Postal Service is given wide latitudeto make its products and services as uncontestable as possible. Andif it were found to be a sustainable monopoly, one could askwhether that situation would be better than the one that existsnow. There are at least two reasons why it might. First,competitive configurations give superior, cost-based signals tobuyers so that the value of the service received is greater.Second, the Postal Service would have to face real competitivethreats at all times. In fact, some business at the margins wouldprobably be lost. Therefore, the entire organization would sense ona regular basis that competitors stand ready to take its customers,and it would see some customers leaving. Such pressure might notsatisfy those who envision a market with a number of activereduced if general access to the boxes were allowed. And, manymembers of the general population favor the rule because it reducesthe number of people who havecompetitors, but having a number of active competitors is notalways a viable option.The next section discusses general guidelines for the paper. Thethird section identifies changes that the Postal Service would makeimmediately. Section four looks at how the range of postal productsmight change. It points to general directions and is not precise.The fifth section discusses worksharing and contracting, while thesixth deals with the general issue of cost recognition in ratedesign. It focuses to a considerable extent on weaknesses in thecurrent state of knowledge. The seventh and eighth sections discusscosts by destination and by customer. Then the next two discussinverse price caps and the benefits of having one governmentprovider. A conclusion follows.2. GENERAL GUIDE LINES First, it is necessary to discuss theframework within which the Postal Service's adjustment process willbe considered.As noted above, relaxing the Private Express Statutes is theessential first step. Hiding under the Statutes, however, is a rulemandating that all bills, statements of account, and personal orhandwritten correspondence, if mailed, must be mailed First Class(the MBMFC rule). To a much greater degree than is commonlyrecognized, this rule is critically important to the functioning ofthe Postal Service as it now exists. The MBMFC rule requires asubstantial portion of the mail volume to be sent at highFirst-Class rates, instead of at the lower Standard-A rates, eventhough the senders may not value the high service levels or thespecial features of First Class.6 If the rule were eliminated, thePostal Service would lose a large portion of its revenue,immediately, with little or no reduction in cost, and rateadjustments would have to be made.As an economic matter, it is possible that much of the MBMFCmail is high-demand mail, and thus that the rule segments themarket according to demand. In order to continue benefiting fromthis split, the Postal Service might try to maintain it, evenwithout the Statutes. But since rates based on content are seldomthe outcome of competitive forces, such an effort would in alllikelihood fail. What is important to understand is that the MBMFCrule is fundamental to First Class and Standard A as we know them,and eliminating it would unleash forces that would lead to a majorrestructuring, not to a minor adjustment.In addition, it seems likely that the Postal Service would beprohibited from selling below incremental cost, would be requiredto preserve some form of universal service,7 and would be permittedto adjust its service levels. Also, the Postal Service would beallowed to grant volume discounts and to negotiate contractrates.Another question concerns the most effective way to install aprofit motive. In general, the outcome of effective competitionisovercome by licensing access to the mail box. 6 In addition toits high service levels, First Class offers free forwarding and issealed (legally protected) against inspection. Standard A isdeferrable, without these features, and has a lower rate.expected to be a normal profit level, with the understandingthat unusually efficient firms might achieve supra-normal profitsfor a time. One possibility would be to allow a portion of anyprofit to be used for performance bonuses to management, but therewould be reason for concern if high and persistent profitsresulted. Also, there would be concern if monopoly power allowedcertain products to have excessive prices. In order to attenuatethese concerns, it might be reasonable to place price caps on anyde facto monopoly mail categories, particularly any used by smallmailers with no alternatives.8Within this set of rules, particularly if profits are allowed,the Postal Service would behave much like a profit-maximizing firm.Considerable attention would be paid to demand and to prices thatcould be charged successfully. In addition, one would expect arenewed interest in costs for narrow product categories, even forspecific customers.9If the Private Express Statutes were repealed, it is possiblethat Congress would also change the framework for labornegotiations, especially the no-strike rule and the requirement forbinding arbitration when no agreement is reached throughcollective7 The restriction would be that it must provide some reasonablelevel of service on seemingly reasonable terms to all recipients. 8A regulator might well be required to administer any price caps,incremental-cost floors, or other restrictions. 9 Note that theeffects of Postal Service adjustments could be substantial andwidespread, not only on mailers who have invested heavily aroundthe present structure of products and rates, but also on suchcompetitors as newspapers. Some of these groups would stronglyresist any changes.bargaining. It might also lift the pay caps on managementsalaries. Even without such changes, the Postal Service couldpursue regional wage differentials. For purposes of this paper,however, it is not necessary to specify a new labor environment.What is important is that labor negotiations take place within theframework of a situation where the loss of business to competitorsis an everyday reality. If the Postal Service makes all feasiblechanges and the markets are found not to be contestable, it will bebecause the economies of scale and joint production, and theadvantages of being an incumbent,10 are larger than anydisadvantages associated with the levels of productivity orwages.3. IMMEDIATE CHANGESWith the freedoms and goals described above, there are a numberof changes that the Postal Service would make immediately. First,it would eliminate the "preferred" categories of mail, all of whichhave rates that are below corresponding commercial rates. Thismeans there would be no separate in-county rates, no separate ratesfor classroom material, no separate rates for nonprofitorganizations (which exist both in Periodicals and in Standard A),no separate rates for Library mail,11 and no separate rates forScience-of-10 Other advantages the Postal Service could retain relate tosuch things as the payment of taxes, the need for a return oninvestment, the right of eminent domain, and immunity from parkingtickets. Congress would have to decide on such issues. 11 Free forthe blind mail would continue to be available only if theGovernment continued to provide a subsidy to support it. Also, theGovernment might continue special arrangements relating to voterregistration. As long as there is an appropriation, these programsdo not put the Postal Service at a competitive disadvantage.agriculture mail. Under the rate levels of the most recentlycompleted rate case, eliminating the preferred categories wouldyield about onethird of a billion dollars in additionalrevenue.Second, several special rate arrangements would be discontinued.Specifically, reduced rates for books would be eliminated, and evenif there were a separate subclass for them, it would not have ratesthat are invariant with distance.12 Also, Periodicals would notreceive reduced rates, and any rates that resulted would not dependon the proportion of advertising content.13 These changes wouldincrease revenue by another nine-tenths of a billion dollars. Theseamounts14 are not large, but competition generally preventscharging higher rates to some customers in order to fund reducedrates for others.The above changes would allow substantial reductions in thecomplexity of rates and in the complexity of the data systems,which in turn would allow improvements in the costs and volumes forthe subclasses that remained.A third change that would be made immediately concerns theprovisions for parcel mail in Alaska. Presently, as a matter ofpolicy, senders of parcels to residents in the Alaska Bush (whichis not accessible by surface transportation) pay surface rates formail that is transported by air in low volumes. This would not bedone in a12 The law currently specifies that the rates for books will notvary with distance. This makes the book subclass very inefficientat serving those for whom it was established. 13 Under the existingrate arrangement, the Postal Service can consider externalities insetting rates. This would not occur in a competitive system.competitive system. To places where surface transportation isnot available, senders would be required to pay air rates, andpossibly air rates keyed to the characteristics of the Alaskan airsystem. According to rate case figures, this would provideadditional revenues of about $70 million, but one would expectassociated adjustments that went beyond this figure.Fourth, there would be post office closings. It is not easy topredict which post offices would be closed. Using conservativeguidelines, an analysis done in the late 1970s concluded that about12,000 offices should be closed.15 Services for people using theseoffices would be provided in a less expensive way, using contractstations in some cases. Since a number of offices have been closedin the last 20 years, this estimate of 12,000 may not be current.But if $30,000 per year were saved for 12,000 offices, anotherone-third of a billion dollars would become available.Fifth, there might be changes in the role the Postal Serviceplays in policing the fraudulent use of the mails. In a competitiveenvironment, it might not be left with police powers and the rightto select those activities in the crime area that would give it acompetitive advantage. One alternative would be to turn thisfunction over to the Department of Justice.Finally, there are some operational changes that would probablybe made. 1) The Postal Service would undoubtedly begin14 These amounts were calculated conservatively and would varyby rate case.handling unaddressed mail on city routes,16 even as it doesalready on rural routes.17 2) The Postal Service might stop (orsubstantially alter) its detached address label program foradvertising mail. For mailers, the use of detached labels would bea poor alternative to using unaddressed mail; for the PostalService, the use of detached labels is not well aligned withcurrent and future automation plans, and it may aggravate thealignment of rates and costs. 3) The Postal Service would probablymake changes in the way postage is sold. Currently it adheres to apolicy that postage will be sold at face value, regardless of thecosts associated with its sale. A first step might be discounts forthe use of meter and permit indicia, which cost much less thanstamps, but other changes would follow. (Haldi 1999)4. BASIC PRODUCTS OFFEREDExcept for the creation of worksharing discounts and ExpressMail, the basic product line of the Postal Service was inheritedfrom Congress at the time of Postal reorganization in 1970.18 It isnot15 At the end of FY 1998, there were 27,952 post offices. Eachpost office has a postmaster. This count does not include stations,branches, or contract stations. Annual Report of the PostmasterGeneral, 1998. 16 Unaddressed mail would go to all stops on acarrier's route. Presently, addresses are required on such pieces.This is essentially a make-work scheme: the mailers do the extrawork of putting the address on each piece and the Postal Servicedoes the extra work of arranging these pieces in delivery order.Note that the postal services in many other countries carryunaddressed mail. 17 An alternative to unaddressed mail would be toauction off the right to be a third bundle on specific days inspecific post offices. A related change would be to set box rentsat what the traffic will bear. 18 The Express Mail subclass andECOM were created since 1970. Congress changed the qualificationsfor In-county rates in 1986. The following subclasses have beeneliminated: ECOM, transient, controlled circulation, specialdelivery, and single-piece third. Limited circulation waseliminated, but it was not a subclass.known what products would evolve under competition. To stimulatediscussion, five perspectives are offered below.4.1. Speed of ServiceTwo important characteristics of mail are: 1) it does not costmore to process some batches of mail before others, and 2) thevolume of mail fluctuates. To accommodate these fluctuations anduse resources evenly, it would seem reasonable to offer two tiersof service: rapid and deferred, with air transportation being usedfor the rapid product. Other distinctions are possible, such asbulk and nonbulk, but the speed distinction would seem todominate.The Postal Service has two basic subclasses for letters andflats: First Class (originally rapid, non-bulk, and sealed againstinspection) and Standard A (originally deferrable, bulk, and notsealed against inspection). Over time these distinctions havedeteriorated. First, due in part to worksharing programs, there arenow bulk categories in First Class. Second, a substantial portionof Standard A is entered into the Postal Service near itsdestination, in which case the opportunity to defer is limited.Third, mailers and recipients are demanding on-time delivery ofStandard A, and the Postal Service is accommodating theseinterests. One could argue that many mailers are gettingFirst-Class service at Standard-A rates. Fourth, many mailers ofFirst Class are not concerned about inspection. Fifth, the ratestructures of First Class and Standard A are dissimilar in ratherextreme ways, detracting attention from any focus on service.Nonetheless, the rationality of service tiers remains. If theMBMFC rule was removed and all mailers could choose between 11First Class and Standard A, and if the fundamental distinctionbetween the two was service, one would expect a moderate ratedifference based on a real service difference. Also, one wouldexpect increased similarity in their rate structures. But theassumption that change would center around these two subclass maynot be a good one. More pervasive changes would seem likely, but itis not clear what they would be.4.2. Tolerance for the IrregularThroughout its history, the Postal Service has backed away fromconstraints on the dimensions and characteristics of pieces thatcan be mailed. The view has been that its mission is to serve andthat whatever is mailed will be delivered. In many cases, and oftenfor the same rate, a piece can be handwritten or typed, awkward orstandard in shape, flimsy or stiff.19 This posture has resulted inthe engineers being told to design equipment and mail handlingsystems that will handle a frightening range of mailcharacteristics. This has presented design difficulties and hasresulted in costly equipment. It has also led to operatingdifficulties and to high processing costs.Evidence of tolerance follows: 1) It was not until 1979 that anon-standard surcharge was put on First-Class Mail, and even now itapplies only to the first ounce. 2) Except for some recentautomation categories, there is no rate distinction in First Classamong letters, flats, and parcels. Therefore, a letter weighingmore than one ounce19 In FY 1998, the Postal Service processed 15 billionhandwritten addresses. Annual Report of the Postmaster General,1998. The report says: "Our clerks or our new technology read yourhandwriting, no matter how 'creative' it might be." p. 54.pays the same rate as a flat or a parcel of the same weight. 3)There is no rate distinction in Priority between flats and parcels,even though there could be differences in the equipment used toprocess them. 4) Except for the barcode discount, Periodicals ratesare not based on shape or machinability. Some magazines, forexample, are too heavy to be processed on flat sorting machines andnewspapers would be expected to have costs different from those ofmagazines. 5) Handwritten addresses and pieces without Zip Codesare accepted without surcharge. 6) During high-speed, mechanizedprocessing, some flats with open edges become aerodynamic. Yet,despite a large cost difference, there is no rate distinctionbetween these flats and those that can be processed effectively. 7)Nonautomated First-Class and Standard-A mailers have the option ofrequesting that their mail be processed manually, even though thecosts for such processing are substantially higher than mechanizedprocessing.20 It is doubtful that any of these tolerances wouldexist in a competitive system.Conceptually, one can visualize a streamlined, low-costprocessing system for well-defined letter-size pieces that aremachinereadable. Similar systems could exist for flats and forparcels. Such systems might allow lower rates for qualifying mail,while pieces that would not qualify might be rejected or requiredto pay a surcharge based on costs. Prices that recognize costs sendsignals to mailers concerning the work that needs to be done. Theyprevent high-cost mailers from being cross subsidized by low-costmailers, and they20 See response to interrogatory OCA/USPS-84 in Docket No.R2000-1. 13allow the efficiencies of a low-cost mailstream to be availableto all who can use them.One can surmise that a competitive postal service would do abetter job of presenting technologically feasible, low-cost productoptions to mailers and either rejecting non-conforming pieces orlevying surcharges. Certainly a competitor would go after suchlowcost pieces first, as has Roadway Package Service in the parcelarea.4.3. DemandOne of the hallmarks of competitive pricing is that higherprices are charged to higher-demand customers. This practicebecomes even more pronounced outside of a breakeven requirement,when additions to net revenue can be kept.Under current conventions the Postal Service sets prices forwhole subclasses and cannot select specific customers forsurcharges or discounts. And for these subclasses, there are nocases where a lower price will lead to an increase in net revenue.However, if there are categories of mail that are attractive tocompetitors, these categories should be viewed as extremely elasticand the Postal Service would be expected to move its rates toward alower markup over costs. In other words, competition would force aresponse from the Postal Service.21 Similarly, higher rates wouldbe expected for less elastic categories.21 An extreme, but possibly realistic, situation should not beoverlooked. Suppose a potential competitor needed a critical massin order to begin operations. If one mailer were large enough toprovide that mass, or nearly provide it, that mailer, bythreatening to leave the Postal Service, might be able to negotiateextremely low rates.Dealing with this kind of situation is different from anythingbeing done today. Basically, the Postal Service would be expectedto assess competition and mailers' willingness to pay, and then tosegment its markets as much as possible. Indeed, one would expect adegree of creativity from the Postal Service in finding ways toacknowledge demand.4.4. ContentThe subclasses of mail that exist today are based inconsiderable degree on content. In short, there is a subclass forlibrary materials, one for books, one for bound printed matter, andseveral for periodicals. Further, the periodicals subclasses havestrict rules on enclosures, have regulations that depend on whetherthe publication is bound or unbound, and most have rates thatdepend on whether the material inside is advertising oreditorial.22 Also, there are cases where merchandise is treateddifferent from non-merchandise and where, under the MBMFC rulediscussed above, some kinds of content may use one subclass and notothers.In cases where the willingness to pay of the sender is relatedto content, it might be possible to argue that content wouldcontinue to be recognized in rates. However, it is quite uncommonfor competitive carriers to differentiate based on content.Instead, one would expect the emphasis on content to eitherdecrease significantly or disappear. If content did continue as arate-setting factor, it would probably take a different form fromwhat now exists.22 In postal parlance, editorial is defined as material that isnot advertising. 154.5. Service MeasurementUnder the assumption that the level of service is important,knowledge about the level achieved is important. This has been adifficult issue for the Postal Service. In recent years an externalmeasurement system for First-Class Mail has been developed and onenow exists for Priority, but actual service levels for most othersubclasses have been a great unknown. To fill this void, manymailers measure the service their own mail receives. The PostalService usually responds to these measurements by saying that theyare not statistically valid or that they are not representative.Nevertheless, it is well known that actual service levels are oftenquite far from the published standards.In a Postal Service poised to meet competition, considerablymore effort would be directed toward meeting published standardsand toward measuring the service achieved. Mailers would demandsuch performance and such knowledge. Competitors would jump at thechance to meet unmet mailer needs. A step beyond this issue is thequestion of tracking and tracing. The Postal Service is behind itscompetitors at this point; under competition, catch-up would beexpected to occur at a faster pace.5. WORKSHARING AND CONTRACTINGOne way to compete is to bring the strengths of the privatesector in-house. This can be done through worksharing discounts orcontracts and is especially effective when mailers can do the workin a different way than the Postal Service. (Mitchell 1999) Theamount of work that can be turned over in this way is quitelarge.16Consider the following example. Suppose mailers can sortaddresses on a computer and then print them in ZIP Code order.Suppose further that they can do this for 1.5 cents per piece andthat this saves the Postal Service 4 cents per piece. In the areaswhere worksharing discounts are offered now, the tendency has beento move toward a discount of 4 cents. This lowers the net mailingcost for the mailers involved and makes them less likely to go tocompetitors. However, if the mailers were not on the verge ofstopping the worksharing activity or of going to competitors, thePostal Service would maximize its financial position by giving adiscount closer to the figure of 1.5 cents. So, with freedom tocompete, there could be important changes in the way worksharingdiscounts are set. Of course, prior to such changes, informationand analysis would be needed.The Postal Service has extensive worksharing discounts. Thereare, however, some limitations. First, no discounts are based onany cost savings associated with the avoidance of collectionactivities. Second, discounts for transportation have been limitedto Standard A, Priority over 5 pounds, and parts of Standard B.There are no dropship discounts in Express Mail, none in FirstClass, limited ones in Periodicals, and none in Special Standard orLibrary Rate. Furthermore, even the dropship discounts in StandardA are limited. For example, mail traveling 2,000 miles to get to adestination facility gets the same dropship discount as similarmail traveling 200 miles. Similarly, 3 truckloads of mail weighing3 ounces per piece get the same dropship discount as 1 truckload ofmail weighing 1 ounce per piece. Clearly the Postal Service coulddo more to transfer some of these operations to the private sectorthrough worksharing discounts.Another way to shift work to the private sector is throughcontracts with suppliers. This also has been done. For example,contractors who submit the lowest bids do nearly all of thelong-haul trucking. Similarly, air transportation is provided undercontract, and a sorting hub for Express Mail is operated undercontract. A number of contract stations also exist for retailservices. There may, however, be limits to how much contracting canbe done effectively, partly because of the time and cost associatedwith utilizing, placing, and monitoring contracts.Consider the contract the Postal Service now has with EmeryWorldwide to process and transport Priority Mail. The idea was forthe low bidder to operate a highly focused sorting andtransportation system designed to get Priority Mail delivered ontime. Suppose, however, with suitable reverence to Adam Smith, onelooks at this plan according to its degree of roundaboutness. Hereis what happens: 1) the Postal Service collects the pieces andbrings them to a central point. 2) The Postal Service goes througha sorting process to separate those pieces that go to Emery. 3)Emery picks up the pieces at the cutoff time and transports them toits own facility. 4) The pieces are unloaded and fed into sortingmachines. 5) After sorting, the pieces are transported to an airfacility and then sent by air to a destination, possibly usinglower-capacity equipment than the Postal Service might use. 6) Thepieces are loaded on a truck and transported to a Postal Servicefacility. 7) The Postal Service integrates the pieces back into itsown system and takes them to the facility out of which the carriersoperate. This sounds like a lot of steps. Taking a degree ofwriter's license, the alternative is to leave them in the postalsystem, sort them first, transport them immediately, and deliverthem.The jury is still out on the effectiveness of the Emerycontract. There are indications, however, that Emery is losingmoney, that the Postal Service is spending more than if it had donethe work itself, and that there has not been a significantimprovement in delivery performance. It appears that theroundaboutness and the associated extra steps may be taking a toll.Whether this is an effective avenue to lower costs and improveperformance remains to be seen.Note that the possibility of contracting out is not limited tooperations prior to delivery. If there are economies of scale indelivery, and certainly if mail recipients do not want multiplecarriers accessing their mail boxes, it would be possible to defineroutes, along with their expected workload, and auction them off tothe lowest bidder. This is already done on a few "star routes" atabout one-half the cost of rural carriers, and it is reportedlybeing done by competitors of the Postal Services in the parcelarea. (O'Reilly)6. COST RECOGNITION IN RATE DESIGNRates for the Postal Service are set following extensivehearings before the Postal Rate Commission. Voluminous testimony isprovided, as are the results of numerous cost studies. In fact, thevolume of cost data amounts to tens of thousands of pages. Based onthe data and the testimony submitted, as well as on evidence19submitted by dozens of intervenors, rates are set in a verydetailed way. It is not uncommon for extensive testimony to focuson discount differences of one or two tenths of a cent perpiece.Despite all of this attention, there are weaknesses in what isknow about costs. For example: 1) Little is known about therelative costs of flats and parcels in Priority and Express Mail.2) Not enough is known about the effects of weight on costs inFirst Class and Standard A, despite extensive related testimony23.3) Knowledge is limited on the relation between weight andnon-transportation costs in nearly all subclasses. 4) Not enough isknown about how nontransportation costs vary with distance. 5)Based on studies that have been questioned extensively, the ratesfor Standard-A mail do not vary with weight up to about 3.3 ounces.This means, for example, that for a large mailing going 3,000miles, the same postage would be charged for -ounce piecesrequiring one tractor trailer as would be charged for 3-ouncepieces requiring four tractor trailers. 6) The extent of lowercosts for higher-volume mailers is unknown.If the Postal Service faced competition in all areas, some ofthese weaknesses might be associated with cream that could beskimmed. A response by the Postal Service would be expected.Improved cost studies would result. This is not meant to suggestthat costs have not been studied extensively. A great deal of moneyis being spent on cost studies, but when the budget for thesestudies is23 Competitors understand clearly that 15-ounce pieces ofsaturation mail can be carried privately for less than Standard-Arates, while 4-ounce pieces cannot.compared to a revenue that is near $67 billion, the percentageamount is probably minimal.When it is suggested that the Postal Service should spend moreon cost studies, questions arise about private sector expendituresin this area. There are at least three possibilities. One, otherfirms spend more. Two, most other productive operations are easierto study and understand, since few firms have 40,000 locations anda large proportion of their workforce working outdoors. Three,operating managers in the private sector, based on their extensiveexperience, are allowed to prepare mental estimates of what costsprobably are. However it would work out, it seems clear thatcompetition would improve the alignment of rates and costs.7. COSTS BY DESTINATIONIn recent years a number of studies have analyzed the widelyheld belief that rural routes are more expensive than city routes.The findings confirm the expectation to some extent, but the splitis not clean. It turns out that the income of the recipients isalso important, with many low-income, low-volume city routes beingunprofitable. (Cohen 1993) One reason for being concerned aboutthis issue is the possibility that, were the Private ExpressStatutes to be relaxed, competitors would take the profitableroutes and leave the incumbent administration with the unprofitableroutes.In the same vein, mail for the highest-volume recipients is noteven delivered  the mailers pick it up. In fact, many of theserecipients have unique ZIP Codes and their own sorting bin on thesorting machines. The question then becomes: would acompetitive21postal service establish rate tiers based on the destination ofthe mail? We know, for example, that Roadway Package Service, atleast initially, did not solicit mail for residences and that UPScharges extra for addresses designated as residential. Also, UPSselects certain Zip Codes for an additional surcharge. At least forbulk mailers, and in a computerized world, such rate differencesare easy to manage.The Postal Service could, for example, place a Roman numeral infront of each ZIP Code, yielding a code like I-20878-2619. Thenumeral "I" could indicate a low-cost recipient who picks up mailin bulk. The numeral "II" could indicate locations of averageincome and stop density that are relatively economical to deliver.The numeral "III" could be for high-cost areas.Rates based on numerals could result, even though there would betransaction costs. Such a system, however, might not be the mostdesirable, one downside being that the smallest single-piecemailers could default to a rate that is high enough to cover alldestinations. Also, to the extent that mailers send broadly to alldestinations, a system of this kind would not change postage bills,it would just increase some rates and decrease others.Before leaving the question of higher-cost delivery areas, itshould be noted that a mitigating option might be to reduce thenumber of deliveries per week. (Cohen 1999) Although many observerswould view this as an extreme step it could reduce costs and allowincreased efficiencies. For example, mail could be sorted one dayand delivered the next, resulting in a less demanding schedule.Also, the effect on the recipient might not be as large as commonlyassumed-in effect, one-half of the mail would be delayed oneday.A related service issue is whether there are unreasonabletransportation runs that should be eliminated. That is, a reviewcould be done to see how many transportation runs are scheduledsolely to meet a deadline or a service standard, but which involvevery little mail. These runs could cost far more than the value ofthe small improvement in service.8. COSTS BY CUSTOMERAlthough the details are kept private, it is well known thatmany private-sector firms set rates via contracts with selectedcustomers. Sometimes these are based on agreements that thecustomer will prepare the mail in certain ways; at other times theyare based on a threat that the mailer will find another carrier. Asan economic matter, it is clear that a postal service is better offhaving a customer at a near-cost price than not having the customerat all.Were the Postal Service to be allowed to set rates undercontracts, or to bid for business, it would need costs by customer.At the present time, costs by customer are not available and theService's costing systems are not set up to develop such costs. Inshort, this is a whole new costing area that would need to beundertaken.24If contract rates with selected customers were allowed, severalquestions would need to be addressed. First, would the terms ofeach agreement be made public? The answer is probably yes. Second,would all customers satisfying the requirements of the contract beallowed to use the same rates? The answer here is probably yes aswell, even though private-sector firms would say no on both points.Third, how rigorous and defensible would customer-specific costshave to be in order to qualify as an acceptable base for acontract, and would the costing receive review by any outsideparty? One is tempted to argue that there should be a defensiblestudy, but the problem is obvious- some private firms undoubtedlybase contracts on the judgment of the managers involved.Furthermore, the result can be based on negotiating skills.The prospect of allowing contract prices in a government postalservice, based on judgment and negotiating skills, raises anotherquestion. Specifically, private firms have stockholders. Ifdiscounts are too large, the stockholders pay, along with managerswho may lose their jobs. Whether a government postal service canengage in these kinds of negotiations deserves serious study.9. INVERSE PRICE CAPSIf the Postal Service should have a greater degree of pricingfreedom and be able to engage in negotiations with selectedmailers, one way to provide such freedom, even without furtherchanges, would be to allow the Postal Service to operate underinverse price caps.Within the existing rate-setting framework, the idea of aninverse price cap is to allow the Commission to recommend anaverage price level (or index) that is viewed as a floor. Then thePostal Service could make wide-ranging adjustments of the rates inthe subclass, including contract rates for some of the subclassusers, as long as the average rate for the subclass does not gobelow the inverse cap. If the Commission believed that a low markupfor the subclasses was in order, then the low markup could berecommended. Full review would be provided and all affected partieswould have an opportunity to be heard. This is an alternative tosome recent legislative suggestions that the markup on thecompetitive subclasses as a group must be at least as large as themarkup on all other subclasses.The inverse price cap is a relatively simple notion that wouldrequire no more than a minor adjustment to the law, if one isneeded at all. It deserves further study. Within the framework ofthis paper, it could play a role as well. Specifically, supposeunconstrained competition were allowed but the Postal Serviceturned out to have sufficient market power in some product areas toallow other products to be priced at or near the level ofincremental cost. If this was viewed as unfair competition, anindependent regulatory commission could establish and monitorcertain inverse price caps. This would provide substantial freedomto compete, but within a constrained framework.10. HAVING A GOVERNMENT PROVIDEROne of the questions of this paper is whether the Postal Servicecould become a sustainable monopoly if all protection were removed.There are both disadvantages and advantages to having a singlegovernment provider under these conditions. Among the disadvantagesare that the degree of innovation and product differentiation mightcontinue to be limited. On the advantages side, severalconsiderations are relevant. The Postal Service has established thezones and the ZIP Codes that are now used by all carriers. It alsomanages a forwarding system and a change-of-address system,25 bothof which honor policies on privacy. In addition, it carries mailthat is sealed against inspection and acts as a watchdog overfraudulent use of the mails.If desired, having one carrier would allow the maintenance ofthe mailbox rule (with, as discussed above, a reduction incompetitive pressure), which in turn would be helpful in protectingthe mail. Also, residents could leave originating mail in theirboxes and know who would pick it up and that it would be handledappropriately. Having one carrier would also reduce vehicle trafficin neighborhoods and allow familiarity with recipients. Such acarrier can deal better with irregularities and can watch over thedelivery area.25 If competition was allowed and competitors arose, it might bethat a change-of-address system could be operated by a separateentity and made available to all competitors. This is reportedlybeing done in Sweden.11. CONCLUSIONIt is a common belief that the Private Express Statutes and themailbox rule serve as protection to allow universal service atuniform rates. When viewed in terms of changes the Postal Servicewould likely make if it wished to make itself into a sustainablemonopoly, it becomes clear that these restrictions protect muchmore than just universal service. They also protect the preferredsubclasses of mail, low rates for Periodicals, classifications thatare not market based, rates that do not follow costs, and a rangeof other practices discussed in this paper. If these are notinherently desirable, or if a decision were made to give them lessweight, changes could be made to eliminate them now, even withoutrelaxing the Statutes. If some of them are desirable but notothers, limited changes could be made, one possibility beinginverse price caps.There are, however, benefits to having a government postalservice, in addition to the uniform rates and special ratestructures. Specifically, the Postal Service establishes the zonesand the ZIP Codes, guards privacy, forwards mail, and protectsagainst crime. Also, having one postal system reduces traffic andpollution. Further, if the mailbox rule were maintained, only oneperson will pick up an outgoing letter placed in the mailbox.Further analysis is needed of the benefits of the current systemrelative to the benefits of an alternative system, and of whethersome of the benefits of an alternative system can be obtained bymaking adjustments to the current system.ReferencesCrew, Michael A. and Paul R. Kleindorfer, 1995, "Pricing inPostal Services Under Competitive Entry" in Commercialization ofPostal and Delivery Services: National and InternationalPerspectives, edited by Michael A. Crew and Paul R. Kleindorfer,Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.Cohen, Robert H., William W. Ferguson, John D. Waller, andSpyros S. Xenakis. 1999, "Does the USPS Need a Monopoly to CarryOut its Universal Service Obligation?" presented at the SeventhConference on Postal and Delivery Economics, Sintra, Portugal, June23-26.Cohen, Robert H., William W. Ferguson, and Spyros S. Xenakis,1993, "Rural Delivery and the Universal Service Obligation: AQuantitative Investigation" in Regulation and the Nature of Postaland Delivery Services, edited by Michael A. Crew and Paul R.Kleindorfer, Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.Haldi, John and John T. Schmidt, 1999, "Transaction Costs ofAlternative Postage Payment and Evidencing Systems" in EmergingCompetition in Postal and Delivery Services, edited by Michael A.Crew and Paul R. Kleindorfer, Boston: Kluwer AcademicPublishers.Mitchell, Robert W. 1999, "Postal Worksharing: Welfare,Technical Efficiency, and Pareto Optimality," in EmergingCompetition In Postal and Delivery Services, edited by Michael A.Crew and Paul R. Kleindorfer, Boston: Kluwer AcademicPublishers.O'Reilly, Brian, "They've Got Mail!" Fortune, February 7, 2000,p. 101.