TRENDS IN FIRST-CLASS MAIL VOLUMES WITH EMPHASIS ONBILL/PAYMENT AND ADVERTISING MAIL1Spyros S. XenakisOffice of Rates, Analysis and PlanningU.S. Postal Rate Commission1 July 1999The paper was presented to the Commission in December 1998 andwas revised in June 1999 to include the data from the HouseholdDiary Study conducted in 1997.HIGHLIGHTS AT A GLANCEHousehold and Business MailThe share of First-Class Mail sent by businesses isincreasing while the share sent by households isdecreasing.The Postal system is increasingly becoming a medium forbusiness transactions rather than personal exchange.Bill/Payment MailHousehold bill/payment mail has started losing volume;but the number of pieces lost, so far, is too small to have anymaterial impact on First-Class volume.Payments are declining faster than bills; households arenow making less than one payment by mail for every two billsreceived in the mail.The loss of household bill/payment mail is having moreimpact on First-Class single-piece than presort mail.Advertising MailFirst-Class household advertising mail is growingfast.First-Class advertising mail growth could offset some ofthe loss in bill/payment mail.Standard A mail is also growing fast.In 1998, the Postal Service delivered at least 1.5billion more pieces of advertising than non-advertisingmail.HIGHLIGHTSHousehold and Business MailThe volume of First-Class personal (HH-to-HH) mailcontinues to decline. Between 1990 and 1997, it decreased at a rateof 1.7 percent annually. Its share of total First-Class Mail hasdropped from 8.1 in 1990 to 6.4 percent in 1997. One of the factorscited for the decline in personal mail volume is falling longdistance telephone rates which have made telephone communicationmore affordable and fostered substitution of telephone calls forpersonal mail.Business (NHH-to-NHH) mail is the only sector ofFirst-Class mailstream that has experienced healthy growth in the90s. Between 1990 and 1997, its volume grew at a rate of 4.8percent annually, 3.0 times higher than total First-Class Mail. Itsshare increased from 34.4 percent in 1990 to 42.7 percent in 1997.The prevailing view is that the high growth of business mailreflects the healthy growth of the U.S. economy.The share of First-Class Mail sent by businesses (i.e.,NHH-to-HH and NHH-to-NHH mail) is increasing while the share sentby households is decreasing. In 1997, businesses originated 84percent of First-Class Mail, up from 77 percent in 1990.The above trends support the observation that the Postalsystem is increasingly becoming a medium for business transactionsrather than personal exchange.Bill/Payment MailHousehold bill/payment mail, as defined in this analysis,includes both the household payment mail (i.e., First-Class Mailused by households to pay their bills) and the household bill mail(i.e., First-Class Mail used by businesses to send bills tohouseholds). The volume of business bill/payment mail (i.e., mailused by businesses to pay their bills and send bills to otherbusinesses) is unknown and is not covered in thisanalysis.In 1997, household bill/payment mail totaled 24.8 billionpieces or 24.9 percent of First-Class Mail. Of those, 7.5 billionpieces were payments and 17.3 billion pieces were bills.Household bill/payment mail is now declining. Its annualgrowth has dropped from8.0 percent in 1987-90 to 0.3 percent in 1990-93 and further tonegative 1.3 percent in 1993-97.So far, however, the number of bill/payment pieces lostis too small to have any material impact on First-Class volume.Payment mail is declining fast while bill mail is still increasing,though at a falling rate. Between 1990 and 1997, the number ofpayments made by households declined by 2.5 billion pieces but thenumber of bills received increased by 1.4 billion pieces. As aresult, the total bill/payment mail decreased by only 1.1 billionpieces in seven years.So far, it seems that households are converting frompaying by mail to other methods of payment at a faster rate thanbusinesses are converting their methods of sending bills.Consequently, the ratio of payments made by mail to bills receivedin the mail has dropped from 62.7 percent in 1990 to 43.1 percentin 1997. On average, households are making less than one payment bymail for every two bills received in the mail.Payment mail is all First-Class single-piecenon-presorted letters, while bill mail consists mostly of presortedletters. So far, the former has been more vulnerable to diversionthan the latter. Thus, the diversion of bill-paying by mail toother methods of bill-paying is having more impact on First-Classsingle-piece than presort mail.Advertising MailHousehold advertising mail, as used in this analysis,includes only First-Class stand-alone advertising mail that is sentby businesses to households. It does not include advertisingstuffers (i.e., advertising mail sent enclosed with other itemssuch as bills). Moreover, the volume of business advertising mail(i.e., advertising mail sent by businesses to other businesses) isunknown and, thus, it is not addressed in this analysis.In 1997, First-Class household advertising mail amountedto 9.9 billion pieces or9.9 percent of First-Class Mail.First-Class household advertising mail is growing fast.Between 1987 and 1997, it grew at a rate of 6.6 percent annually.Its volume almost doubled in ten years. It grew from 5.2 billionpieces in 1987 to 9.9 billion pieces in 1997. If this trendcontinues, First-Class advertising mail growth may offset the lossin bill/payment mail, allowing First-Class Mail to maintain itscurrent growth.If we subtract the 9.9 billion pieces of First-Classhousehold advertising mail, reported for 1997, from 1998First-Class volume and add them to Standard A mail volume, weobtain the following figures for 1998: (a) 91.3 billion pieces ofnonadvertising mail; and (b) 92.8 billion pieces of advertisingmail. Thus, in 1998, the Postal Service delivered at least 1.5billion more pieces of advertising than nonadvertising mail.(Because of lack of data for 1998, we have assumed that First-Classadvertising mail volume stayed constant between 1997 and1998).The high growth rates of both First-Class advertising andStandard A mail have contributed to shifting the balance in favorof more advertising than nonadvertising mail in the Postal Servicemailstream. In the last two years, 1997 and 1998, Standard A mailgrew at a rate of 7.5 percent annually, five times higher thanFirst-Class Mail.With First-Class household advertising and Standard Amail growing at high rates, it is expected that the trend of moreadvertising than non-advertising mail in the Postal Servicemailstream will continue for the years to come. This may haveserious political implications for the legal protection of thePostal Service monopoly on letter mail. The public and the Congressmay question such protection when they learn that the PostalService is increasingly becoming an advertising medium.ANALYSISIntroductionThe focus of this paper is First-Class Mail. First, we identifythe sectors or flows of First-Class Mail and evaluate their volumegrowth. Then, we turn our attention to First-Class household mailand evaluate the growth of two of its uses: bill-paying andadvertising. As far as I know, this is the first time the growthrates of First-Class Mail sectors and uses have been analyzed.For the purpose of this analysis, bill/payment mail is broadlydefined as First-Class Mail used by households to pay their billsas well as First-Class Mail used by non-households to send bills tohouseholds. On the other hand, advertising mail is narrowly definedas First-Class stand-alone advertising mail, i.e., First-Class Mailused exclusively for advertising. Because of their importance, wewill revisit these definitions later during the review ofbill/payment and advertising mail data.Household Diary StudyAll data used in this analysis come from a market research studycalled the Household Diary Study (HDS). Thus, before we turn to thedata, I would like to review some highlights related to thisstudy.HDS is financed by the Postal Service and is conducted annuallyby Chilton Research Services, a market research firm located inRadnor, Pennsylvania. The study was first conducted in 1987. Thelast data report available to us is for 1997. Thus, we havehousehold diary data for ten years, which we use for thisanalysis.2HDS collects data on mail either sent or received by households.The analysis of these data provides a detailed description of thehousehold portion of the Postal Service mailstream. HDS does notcollect any information on mail sent from non-households to othernon-households. Thus, the non-household or business portion of themailstream is not analyzed by the study.The data are collected on a fiscal year basis. HDS is designedso that data collected in a given year can be compared with datacollected in preceding or subsequent years. This allows us to makeinter-temporal data comparisons and develop volume growth rates.The Postal Service and the Commission have been using HDS data forvolume forecasting and ratemaking purposes during rate cases.Additionally, the Postal Service uses the data for planning andmarketing purposes.In 1977, the Survey Research Center of the University ofMichigan conducted two studies on behalf of the Postal Service: theHousehold Mailstream Study (HMS) which, like HDS, analyzed thehousehold mail; and the Non-household Mailstream Study (NMS), whichanalyzed the business portion of the mailstream. These studieswere, however, conducted only once. Thus, we do not have data forthe years between 1977 and 1987 for annual comparisons.HDS collects information on household mail by surveying a randomsample of 5,300 households per year. Each household is surveyed fora randomly selected week. During the first 14 and final four highvolume weeks of the postal fiscal year, 200 households are surveyedper week; for the remainder of the year, 50 households are surveyedweekly.After an entry interview and training, selected members of thehousehold are asked to keep a diary of every mail piece sent orreceived by the household during the sample week. The entryinterview provides mainly information on household demographics,like the size and income of the household, and the education andemployment of the head of the household. The interviewer alsocollects information about the household's attitudes andresponsiveness regarding mail.3The data used in this analysis are mostly collected by theweek-long diary of household mail. The diary mainly collectsinformation on: the class and subclass of mail sent or received byhouseholds, the sector or flow of this mail, the content or use ofit, and the industry source of household mail originating innon-households.Sectors or Flows of First-Class MailTable 1 shows the breakdown of First-Class Mail by sector orflow for FYs 1987, 1990, 1993 and 1997. The first row of the tableidentifies the First-Class Mail in the HH-to-HH(Household-to-Household) sector. This mail, also called personalmail, is sent by households to other households and includes mainlyholiday greeting cards like Christmas cards, other cards, letters,and invitations like a wedding invitation. This sector does notinclude bill/payment or advertising mail.A subject that is discussed during the entry interview is thehousehold's reaction to advertising mail. The respondents areasked, among other things, if they read advertising mail and ifthey find it useful. Surprisingly, in 1997, 69 percent of therespondents said that they read or look at advertising mail, and 60percent said that they find it useful or interesting.1/ Personal Mail: First-Class Mail sent by households to otherhouseholds (e.g. holiday greeting cards, other cards, letters, andinvitations). This sector does not include bill/payment oradvertising mail.2/ First-Class Mail sent by households to non-households (e.g.payments made to utility and credit card companies; and ordersplaced or payments made in response to advertising). About 81percent of HH-to-NHH mail contains some type of payment and isclassified as bill/payment mail. This sector does not contain anyadvertising mail.3/ First-Class Mail sent by non-households to households (e.g.utility, credit card, insurance and medical bills as well asadvertisements from credit card companies, publishers, leisureservices and banks). This sector is the only source of advertisingmail shown in Table 2.4/ Household Mail: First-Class Mail either sent or received byhouseholds.5/ Business Mail: First-Class Mail sent by non-households toother non-households. This mail is not subject to HDS.The second row of the table is devoted to First-Class Mail inHH-to-NHH (Household-to-Non-household) sector. This mail is sent byhouseholds to non-households and includes mainly payments made toutility and credit card companies as well as orders placed orpayments made in response to advertising. About 81 percent of thismail contains some type of payment and is classified asbill/payment mail. This sector does not contain advertisingmail.The third row shows the First-Class Mail in the NHH-to-HH(Non-household-to-Household) sector. This mail is sent bynon-households to households and includes utility, credit card,insurance and medical bills as well as advertisements from creditcard companies, publishers, leisure services and banks.The fourth row, labeled "Subtotal" shows the First-Classhousehold mail as the sum of mail in the above three sectors. Thisis the First-Class Mail either sent or received by all householdsand is subject to analysis by HDS.The fifth row is devoted to First-Class Mail in NHH-to-NHH(Non-household-to-Non-household) sector. This mail, also calledbusiness mail, is sent by non-households to other non-households.HDS does not survey this mail, and thus, we practically knownothing about its uses. More importantly, we do not know how muchof business mail is used for bill-paying or advertising. Thus, theFirst-Class bill/payment and advertising mail volumes presented inthis analysis do not include the business bill/payment andadvertising mail.The sixth row, labeled "Unknown" shows some First-Class Mailthat cannot be identified with any of the aforementioned foursectors. This mail is insignificant, except for FY 1987, the firstyear the study was conducted. Finally, the last row, labeled"Total" is devoted to total First-Class Mail.Now let us turn to columns in Table 1. Columns (1), (3), (6),and (9), labeled "Volume" show, in millions, the total First-ClassMail pieces broken-down by sector for FYs 1987, 1990, 1993 and1997, respectively. For example, the first number in Column (9)shows that in FY 1997 the HH-to-HH or Personal Mail volume was 6.4billion pieces. Similarly, the last number in Column (9) shows thatthe total First-Class volume was 99.7 billion pieces in FY1997.Columns (2), (4), (7), and (10), labeled "Share of Total" showthe volume share of each sector in total First-Class Mail for theaforementioned fiscal years. For example, the first number inColumn (10) shows that in FY 1997, the volume of mail sent byhouseholds to other households represented 6.6 percent of totalFirst-Class volume.Finally, Columns (5), (8), and (11), labeled "Annual Growth"show the annual volume growth rates of all sectors and totalFirst-Class Mail for the time periods 1987-90, 1990-93 and 1993-97,respectively. For example, the first number in Column (11) showsthat, between 1993 and 1997, personal mail volume declined by 2.0percent annually. Similarly, the last number in Column (11) showsthat for, the same time period, total First-Class Mail volumeincreased by 2.0 percent annually. It should be noted that thenumbers in Columns (5), (8), and (11) are average annual growthrates. If someone wants to estimate the cumulative volume growthfor a period, she has to multiply the annual growth rates inColumns (5), (8), and (11) by the number of years in theperiod.Now let us evaluate the historical volume data in Table 1. Inthe 90s (1990-97), only NHH-to-NHH (business) mail has experiencedhealthy volume growth. All other sectors and total household mailhave suffered either volume decline or anemic growth rates.HH-to-HH (personal) mail is the smallest sector of First-ClassMail. Its annual growth rate fell from 0.6 percent in 1987-90 tonegative 1.4 percent in 1990-93 and further to negative 2.0 percentin 1993-97. Its volume declined from 7.2 billion pieces in 1990to6.4 billion pieces in 1997. Finally, its share of totalFirst-Class Mail dropped from 8.1 percent in 1990 to 6.4 percent in1997. One of the factors cited for the decline in personal mailvolume is falling long distance telephone rates which have madetelephone communication more affordable and fostered substitutionof telephone calls for personal mail.The HH-to-NHH sector, which consists mainly of payment mail, hasexperienced a steeper volume decline than personal mail in the 90s.Its average annual growth rate fell from 9.9 percent in 1987-90 tonegative 1.6 percent in 1990-93 and further to negative6.8 percent in 1993-97. Its volume declined from 12.8 billionpieces in 1990 to 9.3 billion pieces in 1997, a drop in volume of3.6 billion pieces. Finally, its share of total First-Class Maildropped from 14.4 percent in 1990 to 9.3 percent in 1997. As wewill see in Table 3, the decline in HH-to-NHH volume is mostlyattributed to the decline of this sector's household paymentmail.In the 90s, the volume of NHH-to-HH sector has increased, butits annual growth rate has been falling. Its volume increased from38.2 billion pieces in 1990 to 40.8 billion pieces in 1997. Itsannual growth rate, however, fell from 6.7 percent in 1987-90 to1.9 percent in 1990-93 and further to 0.2 percent in 1993-97.NHH-to-HH mail is now the second largest sector of First-ClassMail. Its share of total First-Class Mail has declined from 42.8percent in 1990 to 41.0 percent in 1997. The NHH-to-HH sectorincludes both bill and advertising mail. As we will see later, thevolumes of both bill and advertising mail, included in this sector,have increased in the 90s. However, the annual growth rate of billmail is declining, whereas the annual growth rate of advertisingmail is increasing fast.Household mail is defined as the sum of mail in the above threesectors and is shown as "Subtotal" in Table 1. Its annual growthrate fell from 6.6 percent in 1987-90 to 0.7 in 1990-93 and furtherto negative 1.4 percent in 1993-97. Its volume declined by 1.9billion pieces between 1990 and 1997; and its share of totalFirst-Class Mail decreased from65.3 percent in 1990 to 56.6 percent in 1997.NHH-to-NHH(business mail) is the only sector of First-Class Mail that hasexperienced healthy growth in the 90s. Its annual growth rates wereas follows: 2.2 percent in 1987-90; 1.7 percent in 1990-93; and 7.1percent in 1993-97. Its volume grew from 30.7billion pieces in 1990 to 42.6 billion pieces in 1996, anincrease in volume of 11.9 billion pieces. Finally, its share oftotal First-Class Mail increased from 34.4 percent in 1990 to42.7 percent in 1997. The prevailing view is that the highgrowth of business mail reflects the healthy growth of the U.S.economy. In Docket No. R97-1, referring to period 1977-95, PostalService volume witness Tolley first observed that "the generaltrend has been a decrease in the share of First-Class letters sentby households and an increase in the share sent bynon-households."4 He then testified that the increase innon-household originated mail "reflects the importance of mail asan input in the production of goods and services in the economy,with mail volume being associated importantly with growth in outputof goods and services in the economy and in demands forcommunication in production."Bill/Payment and Advertising MailTable 2 has the same format as Table 1 and shows the breakdownof First-Class Mail by use. The first row labeled "Personal Mail"and the sixth row labeled "Business Mail" are identical to firstand fifth rows in Table 1, respectively. The second, third, andfourth rows labeled "Bill/Payment," "Advertising," and "Other HHMail" identify the uses of HH-to-NHH and NHH-to-HH mail reported insecond and third rows of Table 1.Bill/payment mail includes both the household payment mail(i.e., First-Class Mail used by households to pay their bills) andthe household bill mail (i.e., First-Class Mail used bynon-households to send bills to households). On the other hand,advertising mail includes only First-Class stand-alone advertisingmail (i.e., First-Class Mail used exclusively for advertising) thatis sent by non-households to households. Advertising mail does notinclude advertising stuffers, i.e., advertising mail sent enclosedwith other items such as bills. Neither does it include the mailsent in response to advertising. A large portion ofresponse-to-advertising mail involves a payment and is included inbill/payment mail. If the response-to-advertising mail were alsoadded to advertising mail it would have resulted in doublecounting.The volume of letters sent by households or household originatedmail can be obtained from Table 1 by adding the volumes of HH-to-HHand HH-to-NHH mail. In 1997, households originated only 16 percentof First-Class mail, down from 23 percent in 1990. The volume ofletters sent by non-households or nonhousehold originated mail canalso be calculated from Table 1 by adding NHH-to-HH and NHH-to-NHHvolumes. In 1997, non-households sent 84 percent of First-ClassMail, up from 77 percent in 1990.1/ Bill/payment mail includes both the household payment mail(i.e., First-Class Mail used by households to pay their bills) andthe household bill mail (i.e., First-Class Mail used bynon-households to send bills to households). The volume of businessbill/payment mail (i.e., mail used by non-households to pay theirbills and send bills to other non-households) is unknown and is notincluded in bill/payment mail.2/ Advertising mail only includes First-Class stand-aloneadvertising mail that is sent by businesses to households. It doesnot include advertising stuffers (i.e., advertising mail sentenclosed with other items such as bills). Moreover, the volume ofbusiness advertising mail (i.e., advertising mail sent bynon-households to other non-households) is not known and, thus, itis not included in advertising mail. Finally, it does not includethe mail sent by both households and non-households in response toadvertising.3/ Other HH mail is the residual household First-Class Mail withthe following major uses: financial statements,announcements/meetings, notices of order, request for andconfirmation of donations, tax forms, education acceptances, andinsurance policies.It should be noted that the figures of bill/payment andadvertising mail presented in Table 2 account only for theFirst-Class household mail and, thus, represent the lower bound ofFirst-Class bill/payment and advertising mail volumes. The volumeof business bill/payment mail (i.e., mail used by non-households topay their bills and send bills to other non-households) is unknownand, thus, it is not included in bill/payment mail figurespresented in this table. Likewise, the volume of businessadvertising mail (i.e., advertising mail sent by non-households toother households) is not known and, thus, it has not been added toadvertising mail.In 1997, household bill/payment mail amounted to 24.8 billionpieces or 24.9 percent of First-Class Mail; and First-Classhousehold advertising mail amounted to 9.9 billion pieces or 9.9percent of First-Class Mail.The growth of bill/payment mail has slowed down significantly inthe 90s. Its average annual growth rate dropped from 8.0 percent in1987-90 to 0.3 percent in 1990-93 and further to negative 1.3percent in 1993-97. Its share dropped from 29.1 percent in 1990 to24.9 percent in 1997. So far, however, the number of mail pieceslost to alternative bill-paying methods is too small to have anymaterial impact on First-Class volume. Between 1990 and 1997,bill/payment volume declined by only 1.1 billion pieces. Theserepresent an average loss of 160 million pieces or less than 0.2percent of First-Class Mail annually.Advertising mail has experienced high growth rates in allperiods. In 1987-90, it enjoyed a very high growth rate of 15.3percent annually; in 1990-93, its growth slowed down to a healthy3.0 percent annually; and in 1993-97, it grew by 3.3 percentannually. Its volume almost doubled in nine years. It grew from 5.2billion pieces in 1987 to 9.9 billion pieces in 1997.In 1997, the volume of total First-Class Mail was 99.7 billionpieces and the volume of Standard A mail (which is mainlyadvertising mail) was 77.3 billion pieces. If we subtract the 9.9billion pieces of First-Class advertising mail from First-Classvolume and add them to Standard A mail volume, we obtain thefollowing figures: (a) 89.8 billion pieces of non-advertising mail;and (b) 87.1 billion pieces of advertising mail. Thus, in 1996, thePostal Service delivered 2.6 billion fewer pieces of advertisingthan non-advertising mail.Now, if we perform the same exercise using the actual FY 1998First-Class and Standard A volume figures of 101.2 billion and 82.9billion pieces respectively, and assuming that First-Classadvertising mail volume has not changed between 1997 and 1998, weobtain the following figures for FY 1998: (a) 91.3 billion piecesof nonadvertising mail; and (b) 92.8 billion pieces of advertisingmail. Thus, in 1998, the Postal Service delivered 1.5 billion morepieces of advertising than non-advertising mail.It should be pointed out that high growth rates of bothFirst-Class advertising and Standard A mail have contributed toshifting the balance in favor of more advertising thannon-advertising mail in the Postal Service mailstream. In the lasttwo Fiscal Years, 1997 and 1998, Standard A mail grew at an averageannual rate of 7.5 percent, five times higher than First-ClassMail.5With First-Class advertising and Standard A mail growing at highrates, it is expected that the trend of more advertising thannon-advertising mail in the Postal Service mailstream will continuefor the years to come. This may have serious political implicationsfor the legal protection of the Postal Service monopoly on lettermail. The public and the Congress may question such protection whenit becomes common knowledge that the Postal Service delivers more"junk" than other letter mail.Sources of Bill/Payment MailBill/payment mail can originate either in households ornon-households and its source can be anyone of the following threesectors: HH-to-NHH, NHH-to-HH, and NHH-to-NHH. Table 3, which hasthe same format as the previous two tables, shows the sources oftotal First-Class bill/payment mail reported in Table 2.The first row shows the bill/payment mail that comes from theHH-to-NHH (Household-to-Non-household) sector. This is the paymentmail, i.e., mail used by households to pay their bills. In 1997payment mail was 7.5 billion pieces or 30.1 percent of bill/paymentmail. The total household bill/payment mail, which was firstpresented in the second row of Table 2, is now reported in thefourth row of this table. In 1997 its volume was 24.8 billionpieces.The second row shows the bill/payment mail that comes from theNHH-to-HH (Non-household-to-Household) sector. This is the billmail, i.e., mail used by non-households to send bills tohouseholds. Bill mail was 17.3 billion pieces or 69.9 percent ofbill/payment mail in 1997.The third row is devoted to bill/payment mail that is part ofthe NHH-to-NHH (Non-household-to-Non-household) sector. This is thebusiness bill/payment mail (i.e.,In FY 1997 and FY 1998, Standard A mail grew 7.8 percent and 7.3percent respectively. First-Class Mail grew 1.5 percent in bothyears.10mail used by non-households to send and pay bills to othernon-households). No figures are reported on this row because thevolume of business bill/payment mail is not known to theCommission6.Household payment mail has been declining. Its annual growthrate dropped from positive 9.9 percent in 1987-90 to negative 1.6percent in 1990-93 and further to negative5.9 percent in 1993-97. Its volume declined from 10.0 billionpieces in 1990 to 7.5 billion pieces in 1997, a drop of 2.5 billionpieces. This drop in payment mail volume accounts for 69 percent ofthe decline in the volume of HH-to-NHH sector, amounted to 3.6billion pieces between 1990 and 1997 (see Table 1).The growth rate of household bill mail is also declining but itsvolume has increased in the 90s. Its annual growth rate droppedfrom 6.9 percent in 1987-90 to 1.4 percent in 1990-93 and furtherto 1.0 percent in 1993-97; but its volume increased by 1.4 billionpieces between 1990 and 1997. This increase in the volume of billmail offsets more than half of the decline in the volume of paymentmail allowing bill/payment mail to decline by only 1.1 billionpieces between 1990 and 1996. As said before, the decline inhousehold bill/payment volume, so far, amounts to a very smallportion of First-Class volume.There is another observation that can be made based on householdbill/payment volume figures reported in Table 3. Although bothpayments and bills seem to have been affected by the diversion frompayment by mail to other methods of payment, the effect ofdiversion is more pronounced on payment mail. As a result, theratio of the number of payments made by mail to the number of billsreceived in the mail has dropped from 62.7 percent in 1990 to 43.1percent in 1997. Thus, in 1997, on average, households made lessthan one payment by mail for every two bills received in themail.Finally, payment mail is all First-Class single-piecenon-presorted letters, while bill mail is mostly presorted letters.So far, the former has been more vulnerable to diversion than thelater. Thus, the diversion of bill-paying by mail to other methodsof bill-paying is having more impact on single-piece than presortFirst-Class Mail.First-Class Per-Household VolumesOne of the factors affecting the demand for mail services is thenumber of households. Households send and receive mail and theirnumber is expected to affect the demand for mail services in apositive way. An increase in the number of households is expectedto cause an increase in mail volume.For building "H.R. 22" Model, the Postal Service has assumedthat in 1998 business bill/payment mail was about 20.0 percent ofFirst-Class Mail or 20 billion pieces. If the 20 percent figurewere also true for 1997, then 46.8 percent of business mail wouldhave qualified as bill/payment mail in that year and total (i.e.,household plus business) bill/payment mail would have been 44.7billion pieces or 44.9 percent of First-Class Mail. The PostalService did not tell the Commission where this 20 percent figurecomes from.As we have seen, Tables 1, 2, and 3 show the breakdown of totaldemand for First-Class Mail by sectors and uses for FYs 1987, 1990,1993, and 1997. Now, if we assume that the volume of all sectorsand uses in Tables 1, 2, and 3 have an elasticity of one withrespect to the number of households (i.e., every one percentincrease in the number of households has yielded exactly a onepercent increase in all annual mail volumes and for all years inTables 1, 2, and 3), we can, then, divide the annual volume figuresby the number of households in the respective year to obtain annualvolume figures per household. This process eliminates the effect ofhousehold growth on mail volume and allows an analysis of thevolume behavior at the household level. However, when we analyzethe per-household volume figures, we have to remember that, for thepurpose of developing those figures, we made the aforementionedassumption about the relationship of mail volume and number ofhouseholds and this assumption may not hold true for some or allsectors (or uses) and for some or all years in Tables 1, 2 and3.Tables 4, 5 and 6 display First-Class per-household annualvolumes. They are identical to Tables 1, 2 and 3 respectively,except that the total annual volumes in Tables 1, 2 and 3 have beenreplaced with per-household annual volumes in Tables 4, 5 and 6. Acomparison of figures in Tables 4, 5, and 6 with the correspondingfigures in Tables 1, 2 and 3, respectively, shows that thereplacement of total by per-household volume figures leaves theshares of sectors and uses in total First-Class Mail volumeunchanged. However, because the number of households has beenincreasing every year, the replacement of total by per-householdvolume figures produces annual growth rates which are lower thanthose shown in Tables 1, 2 and 3. That is, the positive annualgrowth rates in Tables 1, 2 and 3 shrink in Tables 4, 5 and 6 andthe negative rates augment in absolute terms.For example, if we compare the annual growth rates of mailvolume for period 1993-97 shown in Column (11) of Tables 1 and 4 wecan see that: (a) the 2.0 percent annual decrease of total HH-to-HHvolume in Table 1 has been augmented to a 3.3 percent annualdecrease of per-household volume in Table 4; (b) the 6.8 percentannual decrease of total HH-to-NHH volume in Table 1 has beenaugmented to a 8.0 percent annual decrease of per-household volumein Table 4; (c) the 0.2 percent annual increase of total NHH-to-HHvolume in Table 1 has shrunk to a 1.2 percent annual decrease ofper-household volume in Table 4; and (d) the 7.1 percent annualincrease of total NHH-to-NHH volume in Table 1 has shrunk to a 5.7percent annual increase of per-household volume in Table 4.Similarly, a comparison of annual growth rates for the sameperiod in Table 2 with those in Table 5 reveals the following: (a)the 2.0 percent annual decrease of bill/payment volume in Table 2has been augmented to a 3.3 percent annual decrease of perhouseholdvolume in Table 5; and (b) the 3.3 percent annual increase of totaladvertising mail volume in Table 2 has shrunk to a 1.8 percentannual increase of per-household volume in Table 5.Finally, a comparison of annual growth rates for 1993-97 inTable 3 with those in Table 6 shows the following: (a) the 5.9percent annual decrease of the total number of payments in Table 3has been augmented to a 7.2 percent annual decrease of the numberof payments per household in Table 6; and (b) the 1.0 percentannual increase of total number of bills in Table 3 has shrunk to a0.3 percent annual decrease of the number of bills per household inTable 6.1/ Personal Mail: First-Class Mail sent by households to otherhouseholds (e.g. holiday greeting cards, other cards, letters, andinvitations). This sector does not include bill/payment oradvertising mail.2/ First-Class Mail sent by households to non-households (e.g.payments made to utility and credit card companies; and ordersplaced or payments made in response to advertising). About 81percent of HH-to-NHH mail contains some type of payment and isclassified as bill/payment mail. This sector does not contain anyadvertising mail.3/ First-Class Mail sent by non-households to households (e.g.utility, credit card, insurance and medical bills as well asadvertisements from credit card companies, publishers, leisureservices and banks). This sector is the only source of advertisingmail shown in Table 2.4/ Household Mail: First-Class Mail either sent or received byhouseholds.5/ Business Mail: First-Class Mail sent by non-households toother non-households. This mail is not subject to HDS.141/ Bill/payment mail includes both the household payment mail(i.e., First-Class Mail used by households to pay their bills) andthe household bill mail (i.e., First-Class Mail used bynon-households to send bills to households). The volume of businessbill/payment mail (i.e., mail used by non-households to pay theirbills and send bills to other non-households) is unknown and is notincluded in bill/payment mail.2/ Advertising mail only includes First-Class stand-aloneadvertising mail that is sent by businesses to households. It doesnot include advertising stuffers (i.e., advertising mail sentenclosed with other items such as bills). Moreover, the volume ofbusiness advertising mail (i.e., advertising mail sent bynon-households to other non-households) is not known and, thus, itis not included in advertising mail. Finally, it does not includethe mail sent by both households and non-households in response toadvertising.3/ Other HH mail is the residual household First-Class Mail withthe following major uses: financial statements, announcements/meetings, notices of order, request for and confirmation ofdonations, tax forms, education acceptances, and insurancepolicies.151/ First-Class household payment mail (i.e., First-Class Mailused by households to pay their bills). 2/ First-Class householdbill mail (i.e., First-Class Mail used by non-households to sendbills to households). 3/ First-Class business bill/payment mail(i.e., mail used by non-households to pay their bills and sendbills to othernon-households). The volume of business bill/payment mail isunknown. HDS does not study the NHH-to-NHH sector of themailstream.16