Introduction As recognized by the President's National Energy Plan (NEP), oneof the principal energy challenges facing us is increasing ourenergy supplies in ways that protect and improve the environment.Thus, the President directed EPA to propose legislation that wouldsignificantly reduce SO2, NOx, and mercury emissions from powergeneration through a cap and trade program. Such a program, coupledwith appropriate measures to address local concerns, would providesignificant health benefits even as we increase energy supplies andmaintain reasonable electricity rates.Our work on this issue has given us insight that I believe willbe helpful to you. The more I learn about the cost andinefficiencies of the current and future regulatory regime to whichpower generators will be subjected if we do not have newlegislation, the more I am convinced that we can --and must --develop a smarter approach that protects the environment and publichealth while reducing the cost to consumers and industry andoptimizing the size of both the state and federal governmentmachinery necessary to achieve that protection. It is possible toachieve better results at lower costs,but not if we simply add yet another program on top of all ofthe existing regulations.The current Clean Air Act has been enormously successful, but wecan do better. Significant cost savings can be achieved for powergenerators and consumers through a comprehensive legislativepackage. I look forward to working with you to develop such anapproach to reduce emissions from power generation. We applaudSenator Jeffords for tackling this important issue and forrecognizing that a cap and trade program is the best way to achievethese reductions. However, we have significant concerns with S. 556as drafted. Our analysis to date suggests that it could increaseconsumers' electricity rates by as much as 50%, which we believe isunacceptable. In addition, the combination of emission reductionsand timing is not feasible and could threaten the reliability ofelectricity supply. We are concerned that S. 556's short timeframesfor installation of controls could lead power plants to be takenoff-line at important times, which could lead to electricityshortages.In addition, there are a number of issues that Congress shouldconsider that S. 556 does not address. As drafted, S. 556 wouldmake some existing requirements unnecessary, but would noteliminate them. Rather than add yet another layer of environmentalregulations on top of the existing ones, we believe that S. 556should eliminate those unnecessary existing requirements. S. 556also does not have an allocation scheme. One lesson we should learnfrom the success of the Acid Rain cap and trade program is thatwhen certain key issues can be resolved through clear legislation,we can avoid years of litigation, business uncertainty and costs,and delayed environmental protection.Finally, and most importantly, the Administration stronglyopposes including CO2 reductions in any multi-pollutant bill. TheCO2 provisions in S. 556 will cost consumers too much and endangerour energy security by causing too much electricity generation toswitch from coal to natural gas. Greenhouse gas emissions should beaddressed in the context of climate change, which is beingundertaken by the President's Cabinet level working group. For allof these reasons, the Administration must oppose S. 556. In mytestimony today I will elaborate further on these key points.Background Over the last 30 years, we have made substantial progresstowards improved environmental quality under the Clean Air Act.During this time, gross domestic product has increased almost 160%.At the same time, we have reduced emissions of six key airpollutants by 29%, while coal consumption has increased 77% andenergy consumption has increased 45%. Eleven years ago PresidentGeorge H. W. Bush signed into law the most far reaching amendmentsto the Clean Air Act since its enactment in 1970. Included in thoseamendments was the Acid Rain cap and trade program, the firstprogram tailored specifically to the utility sector, which isachieving significant environmental and public health benefits at afraction of the initial cost estimates and with relatively littlegovernment bureaucracy. It is time to revisit and update the CleanAir Act once again in order to achieve the additional reductionsneeded to address public health and environmental problems in themost cost effective manner.The Acid Rain Program is achieving its emission reduction goalat a fraction of the estimated costs because it allows andencourages innovative thinking and long range planning.1 Theexisting program establishes a cap on SO2 emissions to ensure thatthe environmental goal is met, and employs an innovativemarket-based allowance trading program to achieve the goal atlowest cost. Allowances are the currency with which compliance withthe SO2 emissions requirements is achieved. Sources, rather thangovernment, decide the most cost-effective way to use availableresources to comply. Units that reduce their emissions below thenumber of allowances they hold may trade allowances with otherunits in the system, sell them to other sources or save them forfuture use. There are neither restrictions on trading norgovernment second-guessing.Allowance trading provides incentives for energy conservationand technology innovation that can both lower the cost ofcompliance and yield pollution prevention benefits. Simply, theallowance market puts a price or value on each ton of SO2 not emitted. The association of a monetary valuewith reduced emissions encourages innovation: in the 1990's,scrubber costs decreased by approximately 40% and scrubber sulfurremoval efficiencies improved from 90% to 95%, and experimentationled to the blending of fuels to lower emissions. To ensure that thecap is met and to provide credibility, sources also are required toinstall systems that continuously monitor and report emissions.The Acid Rain Program has proven to be an excellent model forcap and trade programs. Compliance with the program has been nearly100 percent and annual emissions of SO2 from power plants havealready been reduced over 6 million tons (about 35 percent) from1980 levels. Greater reductions earlier than expected have loweredrisks to human health and provided benefits to the environmentsooner. Acid rain levels were dramatically reduced over large areasof the U.S. and trading did not result in geographic shifting ofemissions, or "hot spots", as some feared.Despite the significant progress we have made under the CleanAir Act, air emissions from power generators are still contributingto serious public health and environmental problems. AdministratorWhitman addressed these concerns extensively in her testimonybefore you on July 26, 2001. Rather than reiterate her testimony, Iwill emphasize just a few of her key points. Problems associatedwith sulfur dioxide (SO2), nitrogen oxides (NOx), and mercuryemissions are of national and international significance, and theinterstate and long range transport of emissions continue to playsignificant roles in the nature and magnitude of the problems.Emission and deposition of SO2, NOx, and mercury and theirtransformation byproducts are known to have a wide range of adverseeffects on human health and the environment, including: SO2 and NOx emissions contribute to fine particles, which areassociated with premature mortality, aggravated chronic bronchitis,hospitalizations due to cardio-respiratory symptoms, emergency roomvisits due to aggravated asthma symptoms, and acute respiratorysymptoms.1 Governor Whitman's July 26, 2001, testimony before thisCommittee contains a detailed discussion of the success of the AcidRain cap and trade program.Fine particles formed from power plant emissions as well asmobile source emissions are ofconcern.  NOx emissions contribute to ground-level ozone,which aggravates respiratory illnesses and causes lunginflammation, particularly for at-risk populations such aschildren, the elderly and those afflicted with asthma, emphysema,and other respiratory ailments. Mercury emissions contribute to mercury deposition in water.Children born to women who consume large amounts ofmercury-contaminated fish while pregnant may be at risk forneurodevelopmental defects. SO2 and NOx emissions contribute to atmospheric sulfate andnitrate concentrations that cause visibility impairment, includingimpairment in many national parks and wilderness areas. SO2 and NOx contribute to acid deposition, which damageslakes and streams, adversely affecting the fish and other speciesthat live in them, and leaches nutrients from the soil. NOx emissions contribute to nitrogen deposition that may leadto eutrophication of estuaries and near-coastal waters and candamage forested watersheds.EPA, states, and industry, working together, have made importantstrides in addressing the adverse impacts of fossil fuel combustionby the electric power industry since the passage of the Clean AirAct in 1970. Despite significant improvements in air qualitythroughout the country however, emissions from power generationcontinue to result in serious health, environmental and economicimpacts. In 1999, the electric power industry was responsible for67% of sulfur dioxide emissions, 25% of nitrogen oxide emissions,and 37% of mercury emissions in the United States.Business as Usual The President's flexible, market-based approach to reducingemissions from power generators stands in sharp contrast to thecomplex web of existing regulations which currently confront theindustry. Over the years, Congress, EPA and the States haveresponded to specific environmental and public health problems bydeveloping separate regulatory programs to address the specificproblems. Each individual program uses its own approach on its owntimeline to serve its own purpose. Absent changes to the Act, EPAand states will be forced to follow the same approach in futureregulations. It is time to consolidate and simplify to achieve ourclean air goals. A comprehensive legislative approach withmandatory caps could replace a good portion of the currentregulatory requirements with a system that will reduce theadministrative burden on industry and governments, use market-basedapproaches to lower compliance costs, reduce consumers' costs, andincrease national energy security by providing the industry withmore certainty about its future regulatory obligations. By enactingsuch an approach, we can achieve environmental and public healthprotection more effectively and at less cost. If we do it thePresident's way, it will be a win-win.There are many regulations in place that will reduce airemissions from electric power generation. These regulations includeboth federal and State requirements that address a variety ofemissions including SO2, NOx, CO, PM10, and a number of hazardousair pollutants. These programsinclude the National Ambient Air Quality Standards for SO2,particulate matter and ozone, the section 126 and the NOx SIP Callrules, the Acid Rain Program, new source review, new sourceperformance standards, and the regional haze rule.But the regulation of power generators does not end withexisting regulations. EPA is obligated by a settlement agreement toissue by the end of 2004 a Maximum Achievable Control Technology(MACT) standard to require source-specific controls of mercury andother hazardous air pollutants from electric utilities. Emissionsreductions are required by the end of 2007. States will also berequiring utilities to comply with Best Available RetrofitTechnology (BART) programs (either source-specific standards or atrading program) to meet requirements to reduce regional haze.It is expected that the existing fine particle and ozonestandards now in place will also result in further regulation ofpower generators. Modeling shows that when full implementation ofexisting regulations such as the acid rain program, the NOx SIPCall, the Tier II standards for cars and trucks, the heavy dutydiesel engine standards, and the low sulfur gasoline and dieselfuel rules are taken into account, additional reductions will beneeded to bring areas into attainment. States will be required todevelop plans for these areas. In addition, NOx and SO2 reductionsare also needed to reduce continuing damage from acid rain andnitrogen deposition.Because states and EPA will have to find some way tosignificantly reduce NOx and SO2 emissions, it is probable thatpower generators will be required to reduce their emissionssignificantly. Power generation accounts for a significantpercentage of these emissions, and our analysis shows that thereare significant reductions available at lower cost than from othersources. Additionally, states know that if they do not get thereductions from power generators, they will have to imposesignificant reduction requirements on other local industrial andcommercial sources or impose local transportation controlmeasures.Under current law, the necessary reductions would be achievedthrough the development of individual state plans. States will notjust control their own sources, however. They will be reaching outto control power generators and large industrial facilities inother states because transport from other states contributes toboth ozone and fine particle pollution in many areas. This is whathas happened in the eastern part of the country when statesrealized that emissions from sources in other states weresignificantly contributing to their 1-hour ozone non-attainmentproblems. Under section 126 of the Clean Air Act, a state canpetition EPA and request that EPA require reductions from sourcesoutside the petitioning state's borders. The petitioning state isentitled to relief if EPA finds that the sources are significantlycontributing to the petitioning state's nonattainment problem.EPA's requirement, adopted in response to section 126 petitions,that sources in a number of eastern states reduce NOx emissions wasrecently upheld by the Court of Appeals for the District ofColumbia Circuit. Since states now know that EPA has authority toaddress transport pollution through responses to 126 petitions orby issuing a rule like the NOx SIP Call, we anticipate that stateswill be turning to these types of control approaches early in theSIP process. Although those of us who aretraveling that path with the current 126 petitions and NOx SIPCall believe it will eventually take us to our environmental goal,it has been -- and still is -- a very rocky road for industry,environmentalists, the states, EPA and other stakeholders.This one-at-a-time, uncoordinated series of regulatoryrequirements for the power industry is not the optimal approach forthe environment, the power generation sector, or Americanconsumers. With most plants needing to install control equipment tomeet these requirements, it is likely that this approach would leadto installation of controls that become obsolete and strandedcapital investments as additional requirements are promulgated.Further, the attainment efforts of individual States and localitiesnot only impose costs on these entities, but also can increasecomplexity for companies which face differing requirements whenoperations cross state lines. These factors are exacerbated bylimited timeframes that may constrain available compliance optionsand thwart long range planning. These and other inefficienciespoint to the need for a nationally coordinated approach that couldreduce cost while improving environmental progress andaccountability.Changing the Way We Do Business: Certainty, Flexibility,Accountability and Innovation We believe there is a better way, one that could cost Americanconsumers and industry far less than under current law and ensureprotection of the air we breathe in a far more certain,straightforward manner. I know that many members of this Committeeshare that belief and are also working to develop such an approach.It would provide power generators with more certainty about theirregulatory future and thus allow them to make wiser decisions aboutinvestments in new technology, which would improve energy security.This Administration is developing such a proposal. It will build onthe successes of the Acid Rain cap and trade program. It wouldestablish national cap-and-trade programs for NOx, SO2 and mercuryemissions from power generators (with appropriate measures toaddress local concerns). Such an approach will benefit the powergeneration industry, the economy, and the states, while improvingpublic health and the environment.Up-front knowledge of future requirements for multiplepollutants would lead firms to follow significantly different andless expensive compliance strategies at individual plants, comparedwith compliance choices which must be made as requirements areaddressed in a sequential manner under the current law. The savingscome from the opportunity to make cost-effective plant investmentand retirement decisions with full knowledge of upcoming SO2, NOxand mercury requirements, rather than investing in "add-on" controlequipment to meet the requirements of each regulation. Integration,advance knowledge, and certainty regarding environmentalrequirements will have even greater value over the coming decade asthe electric power industry undergoes further structural changes.An integrated package of measures that addresses both the existingregulatory requirements as well as many future environmental needswould provide the greatest degree of certainty and flexibility forthe industry, while achieving the necessary emission reductions atlower cost than under current law.In exchange for flexibility in methods to control emissions, afull accounting of emissions throughcontinuous monitoring and reporting is essential, as well assignificant consequences for failing to comply. Such provisionshave been critical to the success of the Acid Rain Program,encouraging individual sources to find the most cost-effectivemeans of compliance with the collective emission reductiongoal.Flexibility stimulates technological innovation, fuels economicactivity and reduces cost to industry and consumers. Strategies andtechnologies for the control of SO2, NOx and mercury emissionsexist now, and improved methods are expected to become availableover the next several years. The air pollution control andmonitoring technology industry is expected to continue to respondwith cost-effective compliance solutions just as they have done forthe past 30 years. A predictable demand for such jobs over the next15 years is preferable to the boom and bust cycle created by thecurrent regulatory approach.This approach also would reduce states' administrative burdensand obligations. A national cap and trade program with appropriatecaps for NOx and SO2 could provide the emission reductionsnecessary to bring a significant number of areas into attainmentwith the ozone and fine particle standards. Even those areas thatwould not be brought into attainment by these caps would needsignificantly fewer emission reductions to come into attainment.Our approach would significantly reduce the state resources neededto conduct modeling, planning and regulatory activities to attainthe standards. Additionally, the Acid Rain cap and trade program isadministered with a relatively small staff relying on strong,state-of-the-art data tracking and reporting capabilities. Thus,well-designed national cap and trade programs can help usegovernment resources and taxpayer dollars more efficiently at boththe state and federal level.Caps ensure that environmental goals are met. A cap thatrepresents significant reductions of emissions protects theenvironment by reducing overall loadings. Consideration of localconcerns is important in conjunction with trading provisions.Therefore, the National Energy Plan recommended that theAdministration's approach include appropriate measures to addresslocal concerns, such as the unlikely occurrence of an SO2 "hotspot" or area of concentrated emissions. Significant reductionswill go a long way towards addressing local concerns. In addition,EPA will be conducting modeling that will predict where emissionsreductions will occur. Under the Acid Rain cap and trade program,we have not seen local hot spots because the highest emitters areoften the most cost-effective to control and therefore, the mostlikely to control.As I mentioned, EPA and the Administration are still in theprocess of developing our proposal. Several guidelines are shapingour efforts. These guidelines may provide a valuable basis as youweigh the proposals before you. They will also guide our assessmentof other proposals, including S. 556. These principles arestructured to ensure consistency with the NEP objectives. The NEPgoals of increasing energy supplies, accelerating the protectionand improvement of the environment, and increasing our nation'senergy supply must be advanced. Towards that end, energy diversity,the preservation of electricity generation and transmissionreliability, and improvement of energy9 efficiency/energy intensity of the electric power industryshould be a key consideration. In particular, to prevent thereoccurrence of energy shortages and price volatility, a diversemix of fuel sources should be maintained.Specific Comments on S. 556 We share the desire expressed in S. 556 to significantly reduceand cap emissions of SO2, NOx and mercury from power generation. Weapplaud your acknowledgment of market-based incentives,particularly cap and trade systems, as a powerful tool inenvironmental protection. In this way, S. 556 builds on successfulelements of the Clean Air Act.We do, however, oppose S. 556 because of concerns with the bill-- both with some provisions that are in the bill and with somethat are missing. We believe the emission reductions and timing inthe bill will be too costly for consumers and will endangernational energy security. We believe the bill is missing someprovisions -- it should address the allocation scheme andintegration with existing programs. Finally, we oppose inclusion ofCO2 in this bill.First, let me explain some of our specific concerns about theSO2, NOx, and mercury provisions in the bill. We are concerned thatthe significant emissions reductions are required too quickly. Wedo not believe it is reasonable to expect all the controltechnology installations to be completed in that time frame withoutvery high costs and electricity reliability problems. To meet thesedeadlines, facilities may need to be taken off-line during criticalperiods. Reliability problems could arise as large amounts ofcapacity are taken out of service for extended periods of time toinstall the control equipment necessary to meet the emissionsreduction requirements. The abbreviated time frame would force manygenerators to make these retrofits simultaneously. This wouldsignificantly reduce the amount of generating capacity available tomeet consumer' electrical needs.We have not modeled the specific provisions in S. 556, butuseful information is provided by comparing the analyses EPA andEIA conducted to respond to a request from Senators Smith,Voinovich and Brownback with the analyses responding to a requestfrom Senators Jeffords and Lieberman. In theSmith/Voinovich/Brownback analysis, when we analyzed SO2 and NOxreduction levels similar to S. 556, mercury reduction levels moremodest than S. 556 and no CO2 reductions, we did not findsignificant impacts on coal production or electricity prices.However, in the analysis responding to the Jeffords/Liebermanrequest that had NOx, SO2, mercury and CO2 reduction levels similarto S. 556, we found significant ramifications: approximately a20-30% decline of coal generation and a 30-50% increase inelectricity prices compared to the reference case (depending onassumptions of energy technology penetration).The 90% source-specific control for mercury is also problematic.We have not seen anything that demonstrates that every coal-firedpower plant would be able to achieve 90% source-specific controlsfor mercury by 2007, without considerable fuel switching, whichwould be very disruptive to our economy and undermine energysecurity. In addition, requiring the same level of reduction ataplant that emits 0.1 pounds of mercury and a plant that emits2000 pounds of mercury - regardless of cost - is neither efficientnor necessary.We are also very concerned about the "outdated power plant"provision. Requiring every plant over 30 years old to meet NewSource Performance Standards and New Source Review modificationrequirements seems unnecessary and could undermine the benefits ofthe cap and trade approach. Allowing sources to make reductionswhere it is most economical to do so is one of the reasons cap andtrade programs should be less costly than command-and-controlprograms that achieve the same or even fewer reductions. When youhave a hard cap, as you would under S. 556, requiring emissionreductions at a specific source does not reduce the overall levelof pollution, it just limits industry's flexibility about where tomake the reductions. Layering additional requirements, such as the"outdated power plants" provision, on top of a cap and tradeprogram is very likely to increase costs without providingsignificant environmental benefits.Second, we have concerns about what is not in S. 556. Comparingour experience on the Acid Rain Program with the NOx SIP Call andthe Section 126 petitions demonstrates the benefit of havingcertain key issues decided by Congress rather than left to Agencyrulemakings. Congressional resolution of key issues simplifieswhatever Agency rulemaking is needed and decreases theopportunities for the program to get tied up in protractedlitigation.Perhaps the most important program element not addressed in thebill is integration of this new program with the existing Clean AirAct provisions. An effective market-based approach would make someexisting provisions of the Clean Air Act unnecessary. For example,depending on the ultimate cap levels chosen by Congress, this typeof legislation would obviate the need for Best Available RetrofitTechnology requirements, mercury MACT, and new source reviewcase-by-case technology requirements for power generators.Also missing from S. 556 is the scheme for allocatingallowances. Developing an allocation scheme requires answeringnumerous questions. Should the allowances be auctioned off or behanded out for free? If they are not auctioned, should they beallocated based on heat input or electrical and steam output?Should power generators that do not emit air pollutants (e.g.,hydropower facilities) be given allowances? Should allowanceallocations be updated, and if so, how frequently? Shouldallocations be fuel neutral? Imbedded in these and other questionsare important environmental and energy policy choices withsignificant equity consequences. It may not be efficient for EPA tomake these choices in rulemaking.There are other issues as well that this Committee shouldconsider, such as coordination with existing state and regionalprograms like the Western Regional Air Partnership and the NOxreduction programs in the east. The Committee may also wish toconsider provisions to track environmental progress to evaluate theefficacy of the program this bill would establish.Finally, the Administration strongly opposes includingreductions for CO2 in S. 556 or any multi-pollutant bill. Pursuingsharp reductions in CO2 from the electricity generating sectoralone would cause a dramatic shift from coal to natural gas andthus would run the risk of endangering national energy security,substantially increasing energy prices and harming consumers.The Administration will not support any legislation that wouldcause a significant decline in our nation's ability to use coal asa major source of current and future electricity. At the same time,the Administration will not support any legislation that does notenhance the cleanliness of coal-fired electricity generation andpromote a future for clean coal technologies. In short, theAdministration supports a clean coal policy as a critical componentof our nation's energy and environmental policies, recognizing thatother sources of energy also have a critical role to play.Additionally, as Governor Whitman said when she testified beforeyou in July, including CO2 in this bill will slow down, if notprevent, the consensus necessary for passage of legislation tocontrol multiple emissions from power plants. Governor Whitman andI both believe consensus on the appropriate levels and timing forreductions of NOx, SO2 and mercury is achievable relatively soon.We should not delay the public health and environmental benefitsfrom reduction of these emissions while we wait for consensus todevelop on CO2.We agree that climate change is a serious issue we need toaddress. However, CO2 has never been regulated as a pollutant underthe Clean Air Act and does not pose any direct threat to humanhealth unlike NOx, SO2 and mercury. The current body of scientificknowledge does not provide information regarding atmosphericconcentrations of CO2 or reduction levels necessary to preventdangerous interference with the climate system.In April, the President convened a Cabinet-level policy reviewof this issue and was provided with initial recommendations that heaccepted and announced on June 11. In that regard, theAdministration is implementing two major initiatives on climatescience and advanced energy and sequestration technologies. TheUnited States now spends $1.6 billion annually on climate scienceto reduce uncertainties - a commitment unmatched by any othernation. The "National Climate Change Technology Initiative" willaccelerate priority research and the application of advanced energyand sequestration technologies, recognizing that the real answer toaddressing climate change in the long term lies in the developmentand global introduction of such technologies in this century. Andthe cabinet-level policy review is ongoing. Finally, as greenhousegas emissions are projected to grow exponentially in the developingworld in the next two decades, we must evaluate the costs ofimposing domestic reductions as a very high cost againstpotentially low-cost opportunities for mitigating and sequesteringcarbon emissions in the developing world.We appreciate the role of S. 556 in generating importantdiscussions and emphasizing the importance of a new approach tocontrolling emissions in the power sector. I look forward to theadditional hearings you will need to address these important issuesand to working with the Committeeto develop an approach that the President can support.The history of Clean Air Act legislation is one of greataccomplishments made possible by bipartisan efforts. I thank youfor the opportunity to work with you to continue that greattradition.