TestimonyGAOBefore the Subcommittee on Oversight of Government Management,Restructuring, and the District of Columbia Committee onGovernmental Affairs, U.S. SenateGAO/T-GGD-00-26StatementManagement Reform: Elements of Successful ImprovementInitiativesMr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee:We are pleased to be here today to contribute to theSubcommittee's ongoing efforts to identify ways to improve themanagement and performance of the federal government. As you know,last January we issued a new volume of reports, the Performance andAccountability Series, outlining the major management challengesconfronting our largest federal agencies and the substantialopportunities for improving their performance.1 Many of thechallenges discussed in that series represent long-standing,difficult, and complex problems that our work has shown will not beeasily or quickly resolved. In fact, implementing and sustainingmajor change initiatives requires a cultural transformation formany agencies. Therefore, given the magnitude of the problems anagency may face, and the extensive effort and long period of timeit can take before problems are fully resolved, progress must oftenbe measured initially in terms of whether the agency has a wellthought out management improvement initiative in place to guide itsreform efforts.As agreed with the Subcommittee, this morning we will discussthe elements that our wide-ranging work on federal managementissues suggests are particularly important in implementing andsustaining management improvement initiatives that genuinely takeroot and eventually resolve the problems they are intended to fix.These elements are (1) a demonstrated leadership commitment andaccountability for change; (2) the integration of managementimprovement initiatives into programmatic decisionmaking; (3)thoughtful and rigorous planning to guide decisions, particularlyto address human capital and information technology issues; (4)employee involvement to elicit ideas and build commitment andaccountability; (5) organizational alignment to streamlineoperations and clarify accountability; and (6) strong andcontinuing congressional involvement. Not surprisingly, theelements of successful management improvement initiatives that wewill discuss today are consistent with the approaches shared byperformance-based management efforts under the GovernmentPerformance and Results Act (Results Act) and quality managementthat we discussed in our July 29, 1999, statement for thisSubcommittee.2 Our statement today is based on our broad body ofwork and resulting knowledge of management issues, including ourexamination of the implementation of the Results Act and relatedinitiatives, our reviews of selected National Partnership forReinventing1Maj or Management Challenges and Program Risks(GAO/OCG-99-SET, January 1999).2Management Reform: Using the Results Act and Quality Managementto Improve Federal Performance ( GAO/T-GGD-99-151, July 29, 1999).Page 1 GAO/T-GGD-00-26Demonstrated Leadership Commitment and Accountability forChangeGovernment (NPR) recommendations, and our ongoing analyses ofagency-specific improvement efforts, such as the Internal RevenueService (IRS) modernization.Perhaps the single most important element of successfulmanagement improvement initiatives is the demonstrated commitmentof top leaders to change. This commitment is most prominently shownthrough the personal involvement of top leaders in developing anddirecting reform efforts. Organizations that successfully addresstheir long-standing management weaknesses do not "staff out"responsibility for leading change. Top leadership involvement andclear lines of accountability for making management improvementsare critical to overcoming organizations' natural resistance tochange, marshalling the resources needed in many cases to improvemanagement, and building and maintaining the organizationwidecommitment to new ways to doing business.Commissioner Rossotti's efforts at IRS provide a clear exampleof leadership's commitment to change. The Commissioner hasarticulated a new mission for the agency, together with support forstrategic goals that balance customer service and compliance withtax laws.3 Moreover, the Commissioner has initiated a modernizationeffort that touches virtually every aspect of the agency, includingbusiness practices, organizational structure, management roles andresponsibilities, performance measures, and technology.Commissioner Rossotti has assigned clear executive ownership ofeach of IRS' major initiatives and is using executive steeringcommittees to provide oversight and accountability for driving thechange efforts.Sustaining top leadership commitment to improvement isparticularly challenging in the federal government because of thefrequent turnover of senior agency political officials. As aresult, sustaining improvement initiatives requires commitment andleadership by senior career executives, as well as politicalleaders. Career executives can help provide the long-term focusneeded to institutionalize reforms that political executives' oftenmore limited tenure does not permit. In addition, the otherelements of successful management improvement initiatives that weshall turn to shortly are important for institutionalizing reforminitiatives.3IRS' new mission statement reads, "Provide America's taxpayerstop quality service by helping them understand and meet their taxresponsibilities and by applying the tax law with integrity andfairness to all." IRS' supporting strategic goals are to (1)provide top quality service to each taxpayer, (2) provide serviceto all taxpayers by applying the law with integrity and fairness,and (3) increase productivity by providing a quality workenvironment for its employees.Page 2 GAO/T-GGD-00-26Integration of Management Improvement Initiatives intoProgrammatic DecisionmakingTraditionally, the danger to any management reform is that itcan become a hollow, paper-driven exercise where managementimprovement initiatives are not integrated into the day-to-dayactivities of the organization. Thus, successful organizationsrecognize-and implement reform efforts on the basis of-theessential connection between sound management and the programmaticresults those organizations hope to achieve.The Results Act provides a ready-made statutory mechanism formaking this essential connection, engaging Congress in a discussionof how and when management problems will be addressed, and helpingto pinpoint additional efforts that may be needed. We have foundthat annual performance plans that include precise and measurablegoals for resolving mission-critical management problems areimportant to ensuring that agencies have the institutional capacityto achieve their more resultsoriented programmatic goals. Moreover,by using annual performance plans to set goals to addressmanagement weaknesses, agencies provide themselves and Congresswith a vehicle-the subsequent agency performance reports-fortracking progress in addressing management problems and consideringwhat, if any, additional efforts are needed.Unfortunately, we found that agencies do not consistentlyaddress major management challenges and program risks in theirfiscal year 2000 performance plans.4 In those cases wherechallenges and risks are addressed, agencies use a variety ofapproaches, including setting goals and measures directly linked tothe management challenges and program risks, establishing goals andmeasures that are indirectly related to the challenges and risks,or laying out strategies to address them. Figure 1 shows thedistribution of the 24 agencies covered by the Chief FinancialOfficers Act and their different approaches to addressingmanagement challenges and program risks in their annual performanceplans.4Managing for Results: Opportunities for Continued Improvementsin Agencies' Performance Plans ( GAO/GGD/AIMD-99-215, July 20, 1999).Page 3 GAO/T-GGD-00-26Figure 1: Approaches Used to Address Management Challenges andProgram RisksNote: Numbers do not add up to 100 percent due to rounding.Source: GAO analysis based on agencies' fiscal year 2000performance plans.IRS has important management reform initiatives underway toaddress long-standing management weaknesses, but it missed theopportunity to demonstrate these actions in its portion of theDepartment of the Treasury's fiscal year 2000 performance plan. Forexample, the Department of the Treasury's plan has no goals,measures, or strategies to address several of the high-risk areas5we have identified at IRS, includinginternal control weaknesses over unpaid tax assessments(We found that the lack of a subsidiary ledger impairs IRS' abilityto effectively manage its unpaid assessments. This weakness hasresulted in IRS inappropriately directing collection effortsagainst taxpayers after amounts owed have been paid.);the need to assess the impact of various efforts IRS hasunder way to reduce filing fraud;the need to improve security controls over informationsystems and address weaknesses that place sensitive taxpayer dataat risk to both internal and external threats (Our high-risk updatereported that IRS'5These areas are characterized as "high-risk" because of theirgreater vulnerability to waste, fraud, abuse, andmismanagement.Page 4 GAO/T-GGD-00-26controls do not adequately reduce vulnerability to inappropriatedisclosure.); and weaknesses in internal controls over taxpayer receipts.Similarly, the General Services Administration's (GSA) fiscalyear 2000 annual performance plan does not address severallong-standing problems identified by the GSA Inspector General.These problems include top management's lack of emphasis onensuring that the internal controls are in place to deter fraud,waste, and abuse. GSA's plan also does not fully address issuesraised by the Inspector General related to developing newmanagement information systems and ensuring that automatedinformation systems have the proper controls and safeguards. Theseomissions are significant because GSA's governmentwide oversightand service-provider role, its extensive interaction with theprivate sector, and the billions of taxpayer dollars involved incarrying out its activities, make it especially important thatGSA's operations be adequately protected.Thoughtful and Rigorous Planning to Guide DecisionsThe magnitude of the challenges that many agencies face inaddressing their management weaknesses necessitates substantiveplanning be done to establish (1) clear goals and objectives forthe improvement initiative,(2)the concrete management improvement steps that will betaken, (3) key milestones that will be used to track theimplementation status, and(4)the cost and performance data that will be used to gaugeoverall progress in addressing identified weaknesses. Our workacross the federal government has found the effective use of humancapital and information technology-both separately and,importantly, as they relate to one another-are areas wherethoughtful and rigorous planning is needed if fundamentalmanagement improvements are to be made.For example, we looked at the efforts of four agencies (theDepartments of Agriculture, Health and Human Services, Interior,and Veterans Affairs) to both improve services and reduce staffinglevels in their personnel offices through the better application ofinformation technology.6 The agencies planned to increase operatingefficiencies and improve services by automating paper-basedpersonnel processes. The agencies expected that new hardware and/orsoftware technology would reduce paperwork and workload, therebypermitting sizable staff reductions. However, the agencies made thestaffing reductions before much of the new automation was in place,and automation efforts had not been fully implemented as of6Management Reform: Agencies' Initial Efforts to RestructurePersonnel Operations (GAO/GGD-98-93,July 13, 1998).Page 5 GAO/T-GGD-00-26late 1997. As a result, the agencies were struggling to achievetheir efficiency and service improvement objectives.On a more positive note, we recently reviewed the efforts ofthree agencies (the Postal Service, the Department of VeteransAffairs (VA), and the Park Service) to more strategically managetheir facilities and assets by forming business partnerships withthe private sector.7 In each of the six partnerships that wereviewed, the agency built the expertise to engage in thepartnership and make it successful. For example, the Department ofVeterans Affairs established a separate organizational unit staffedwith professionals experienced in management, architecture, civilengineering, and contracting to manage its partnerships.With regard to planning for major technology projects, IRS hashistorically lacked disciplined and structured processes fordeveloping and managing information technology. We reported inFebruary 1998 that IRS had not clearly defined system modernizationphases, nor had it adequately specified organizational roles,making it unclear who was to do what.8 IRS' systems modernizationchallenges include completing a modernization blueprint to define,direct, and control future modernization efforts and establishingthe management and engineering capability to build and acquiremodernized systems. The key to effectively addressing thesechallenges is to ensure that long-standing modernization managementand technical weaknesses are corrected before IRS invests largesums of modernization funds. As we have reported, IRS recentlyinitiated appropriate first steps to address these weaknesses viaits initial modernization expenditure plan that represents thefirst step in a longterm, incremental modernization program.9The Census Bureau, through its effective use of technology inexpanding the electronic availability of census data, demonstrateshow federal agencies can leverage performance and customersatisfaction through the better use of technology. Before applyingtechnology to its data dissemination efforts, the Bureau releasedmassive amounts of data in printed reports. Now, by using theInternet as its principal medium for disseminating data, the Bureauis able to reduce its reliance on printed7Public-Private Partnerships: Key Elements of FederalBuildings and Facility Partnerships (GAO/GGD-99-23, Feb. 3,1999).8Tax Systems Modernization: Blueprint Is a Good Start But Not YetSufficiently Complete to Build or Acquire Systems (GAO/AIMD/GGD-98-54, Feb. 24,1998).9Tax Systems Modernization: Results of IRS' InitialExpenditure Plan (GAO/AIMD/GGD-99-206, June 15,1999).Page 6 GAO/T-GGD-00-26Employee Involvement to Elicit Ideas and Build Commitment andAccountabilitymaterials, reach a wider audience, and provide its clients withinformation in a format that better meets their needs. The Bureaureports that its customers are responding positively to the shift,with significant growth in the number of customer hits on theCensus Internet site, from about 10,000 per day in 1994 to morethan 850,000 per day in 1999. The Bureau plans to use the Internetas its principal medium for releasing data from the 2000Census.Successful management improvement efforts require the activeinvolvement of managers and staff throughout the organization toprovide ideas for improvements and supply the energy and expertiseneeded to implement changes. Employees at all levels ofhigh-performing organizations participate in--and have a stakein--improving operational and program performance to achieveresults. Our work has shown that high-performing organizations usea number of strategies and techniques to effectively involveemployees, including (1) fostering a performanceoriented culture,(2) working to develop a consensus with unions on goals andstrategies, (3) providing the training that staff need to workeffectively, and (4) devolving authority while focusingaccountability on results.Fostering a performance-oriented culture requires agencymanagement to communicate with staff throughout the organization toinvolve them in the process of designing and implementing change.Setting improvement goals is an important step in gettingorganizations across the government to engage seriously in thedifficult task of change. The central features of the ResultsAct-strategic planning, performance measurement, and publicreporting and accountability-can serve as powerful tools to helpchange the basic culture of government. Involving employees indeveloping and implementing these goals and measures can helpdirect a diverse array of actions to improve performance andachieve results. However, our survey of federal managers, conductedin late 1996 and 1997, indicates there is substantial room forimprovement in this area. This survey found that only one-third ofnon-SES managers (as opposed to nearly three-fourths of the SESmanagers) reported they had been involved in establishing long-termstrategic goals for their agencies.10Employees in high-performing organizations understand theimportance of and the connection between their performance and theorganization's10The Government Performance and Results Act: 1997 GovernmentwideImplementation Will Be Uneven (GAO/GGD-97-109, June 2, 1997).Page 7 GAO/T-GGD-00-2611success. The failure to constructively involve staff in anorganization's improvement efforts means running the risk that thechanges will be more difficult and protracted than necessary. Forexample, in the fall of 1997, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission's(NRC) Office of Inspector General surveyed NRC staff to obtaintheir views on the agency's safety culture. In its June 1998report, the Inspector General noted that the staff had a strongcommitment to protecting public health and safety but expressedhigh levels of uncertainty and confusion about the new directionsin regulatory practices and challenges facing the agency. Employeeswho are confused about the direction their agency is taking willnot be able to effectively focus on results or make as full acontribution as they might otherwise.One way high-performing organizations can enhance employeeinvolvement and gain agreement on an organization's goals andstrategies is by developing partnerships with employee unions. TheU.S. Postal Service's long-standing challenges in labor-managementrelations illustrate the importance of having a shared set oflong-term goals and strategies agreed upon by managers, employees,and unions. As we have reported, labor-management relations at thePostal Service have been characterized by disagreements that have,among other things, hampered efforts to automate some postalsystems that could have resulted in savings and helped the Servicereach its performance goals.12 Although there has been someprogress, problems persist and continue to contribute to highermail processing and delivery costs. To help the Postal Serviceresolve its problems, we have long recommended that the Service andits unions and management associations establish a frameworkagreement to outline common goals. We have also noted that theResults Act can provide an effective framework for union andmanagement representatives to discuss and agree upon goals andstrategies.Employees' capabilities also play an important role in achievingperformance improvements, and training is a key factor enablingemployee involvement. Agencies that expect their employees to takegreater responsibility and be held accountable for results mustensure that the employees have the training and tools they need tofulfill these expectations. In that regard, IRS is beginning toimplement significant changes that will require training forfrontline employees and their supervisors. For example, in lieu ofhiring a large number of seasonal11Major Management Challenges and Program Risks: A GovernmentwidePerspective ( GAO/OCG-99-1,January 1999).12Major Management Challenges and Program Risks: U.S. Postal Service (GAO/OCG-99-21, January1999).Page 8 GAO/T-GGD-00-26employees to handle return processing workload during the annualfiling season, IRS plans to increase the number of permanentemployees and expand their job responsibilities to includecompliance work that they can do after the filing season. Thoseemployees will have to be cross-trained so that they can handleboth their return processing and compliance responsibilities.Training is expected to be a key factor in IRS' efforts to providetop-quality customer service. Further, given the dynamicenvironment agencies face, employees need incentives, training, andsupport to help them continually learn and adapt. Our 1996/97survey found that about 60 percent or more of the supervisors andmanagers reported that their agencies had not provided them withthe training necessary to accomplish critical, results-orientedmanagement tasks.High-performing organizations also seek to involve and engageemployees by devolving authority to lower levels of theorganization. Employees are more likely to support changes whenthey have the necessary amount of authority and flexibility--alongwith commensurate accountability and incentives--to advance theagency's goals and improve performance. Allowing employees to bringtheir expertise and judgement to bear in meeting theirresponsibilities can help agencies capitalize on their employees'talents, leading to more effective and efficient operations andimproved customer service.13 Some federal agencies, such as theSocial Security Administration (SSA), are exploring new ways toinvolve employees by devolving decisionmaking authority. Althoughthe efficacy of this initiative has not been fully assessed, SSAhas been implementing a pilot program to establish a "singledecision maker" position. This program expands the authority ofdisability examiners, who currently make initial disabilitydeterminations jointly with physicians, and allows the singledecision maker to make the initial disability determination andconsult with physicians only as needed.14Our work has shown that agencies can improve the extent to whichthey devolve authority for employees to make decisions and theextent to which they hold employees accountable for results. Our1996/97 survey of federal managers found that less than one-thirdof non-SES managers felt that to a great or very great extent theyhad the decisionmaking authority needed to accomplish strategicgoals. Likewise, only about half of the managers we13 Executive Guide: Effectively Implementing the GovernmentPerformance and Results Act ( GAO/GGD-96-118, June 1996).SSA Disability Redesign: Actions Needed To Enhance FutureProgress (GAO/HEHS-99-25, Mar. 12,1999).Page 9 GAO/T-GGD-00-26surveyed reported that they were being held accountable forprogram results.Our work has also shown that agencies can do a better job ofproviding incentives to encourage employees to improve performanceand achieve results. Only one-fourth of non-SES managers reportedthat to a great or very great extent employees received positiverecognition from their agencies for efforts to help accomplishstrategic goals. At the request of this Subcommittee, we aresurveying federal managers again to follow up on whether there havebeen improvements in these critical areas.Some agencies have explored new ways of devolving decisionmakingauthority in exchange for operational flexibility andaccountability for results. For example, in fiscal year 1996, theVeterans Health Administration (VHA) management structure wasdecentralized to form 22 Veterans Integrated Service Networks.15 VAgave these networks substantial operational autonomy and theability to perform basic decisionmaking and budgetary duties. VAmade the networks accountable for results such as improving patientaccess, efficiency, and reducing costs. VA also establishedperformance measures, such as increasing the number of outpatientsurgeries, reducing the use of inpatient care, and increasing thenumber of high-priority veterans served to hold network and medicalcenter directors accountable for results.Organizational Alignment to Streamline Operations and ClarifyAccountabilitySuccessful management improvement efforts often entailorganizational realignment to better achieve results and clarifyaccountability. For example, GSA has sought to improve itsefficiency and effectiveness by changing its organizationalstructure to separate its policymaking functions from itsoperations that provide services. GSA recognized that it sufferedfrom conflicting policymaking and service-providing roles andneeded to replace its outmoded methods of delivering service. Toaddress this issue, GSA established the Office of Policy, Planning,and Evaluation in 1995, which it later renamed the Office ofGovernmentwide Policy, to handle policy decisions separately fromfunctions that deliver supplies or services. GSA believes that thisrealignment has improved efficiency and reduced the perception ofconflict of interest that existed prior to the separation of itspolicymaking and service-delivery roles.While GSA's efforts thus far are an important reform, additionalopportunities for organizational realignment appear to exist. Forexample,15VA Health Care: More Veterans Are Being Served, But BetterOversight Is Needed (GAO/HEHS-98-226, Aug. 28, 1998).Page 10 GAO/T-GGD-00-26the GSA Inspector General has expressed concerns that GSA'sorganization and management structure has not kept pace with GSA'sdownsizing, streamlining, and reform efforts. In addition, theInspector General has said that GSA's organizational structure doesnot seem to match the responsibility for managing programs with theauthority to do so. As a result, for example, GSA has facedsituations where regions (which operate independently) have takendivergent positions on similar issues, according to the InspectorGeneral.IRS' ongoing efforts provide another example of the importanceof aligning organizational structures. As Commissioner Rossotti hasstated, IRS' current cumbersome organizational structure andinadequate technology are the principal obstacles to deliveringdramatic improvements in customer service and productivity. TheCommissioner is reorganizing IRS with the aim of building anorganization designed around taxpayer groups and creatingmanagement roles with clear responsibilities. One of the firstorganizational realignments taking place is in the Office of theTaxpayer Advocate. This office is intended to, among other things,help taxpayers who cannot get their problems resolved throughnormal IRS channels. Formerly, the Advocate's Office had to rely onfunctional groups within IRS, like examination and collection, toprovide most of its program resources-including staff, space, andequipment.16 When functional needs conflicted with Advocate Officeneeds, there was no assurance that advocate needs would be met. Inthe new organization, all advocate program resources will becontrolled and managed by the Taxpayer Advocate. By organizing thisway, IRS hopes to improve both program efficiency and service totaxpayers.The organizational realignments at GSA and IRS are consistentwith a more general exploration under way to use streamlined andclarified organizational arrangements to help enhanceaccountability and improve performance. For example, building onreform efforts in the United Kingdom and other countries, theAdministration has proposed creating Performance-BasedOrganizations (PBOs) in which selected agencies that delivermeasurable services receive greater organizational autonomy inexchange for heightened accountability for results on the part oftop and senior leadership. Last year, in an attempt to addresssignificant management and accountability problems with federalstudent financial aid programs, Congress enacted the first PBO, theOffice of Student Financial Assistance, within the Department ofEducation. We haveIRS Management: IRS Faces Challenges as it Restructures theOffice of the Taxpayer Advocate ( GAO/GGD-99-124, July 15, 1999).Page 11 GAO/T-GGD-00-26identified the management of student financial aid programs,with more than $150 billion in outstanding student loans, as beingat high-risk to waste, fraud, abuse, and mismanagement.The PBO structure exemplifies new directions in accountabilityfor the federal government because the PBO's Chief OperatingOfficer, who reports to the Secretary of Education, is helddirectly and personally accountable, through an employmentcontract, for achieving measurable organizational and individualgoals. The Chief Operating Officer is appointed by the Secretary ofEducation to a minimum 3-year and a maximum 5-year term, and mayreceive a bonus for meeting the performance goals or be removed forfailing to meet them.The Office of Student Financial Assistance was provided withincreased flexibility for procurement and personnel management, andkey managers are to be held directly accountable for performanceobjectives that include(1) improving customer satisfaction; (2) providing high qualitycosteffective services; and (3) providing complete, accurate, andtimely data to ensure program integrity. The Chief OperatingOfficer is to enter into annual performance agreements containingmeasurable organization and individual goals with key managers, whocan receive a bonus or can also be removed.An additional accountability mechanism is that the ChiefOperating Officer and the Secretary of Education are required toagree on, and make public, a 5-year performance plan thatestablishes the Office's goals and objectives. To furtherunderscore accountability issues, the PBO's Chief Operating Officeris to annually prepare and submit to Congress, through theSecretary, a report on the performance of the PBO. The report is toinclude an evaluation of the extent to which the Office met thegoals and objectives contained in the 5-year performance plan. Inaddition, the annual report is to include (1) an independentfinancial audit, (2) applicable financial and performancerequirements under the Chief Financial Officers Act and the ResultsAct, (3) the results achieved by the Office relative to its goals,(4) an evaluation of the Chief Operating Officer's performance, (5)recommendations for legislative and regulatory changes to improveservice and program integrity, and (6) other information asdetailed by the Director of the Office of Management andBudget.Page 12 GAO/T-GGD-00-26Strong and Continuing Congressional InvolvementFinally, Congress plays a crucial role in management improvementefforts throughout the executive branch through its legislative andoversight capacities. On a governmentwide basis, Congress, underthe bi-partisan leadership of this Committee and the HouseGovernment Reform Committee, has established a statutory frameworkconsisting of requirements for goal-setting and performancemeasurement, financial management, and information technologymanagement, all aimed at improving the performance, management, andaccountability of the federal government. Through the enactment ofthe framework and its efforts to foster the framework'simplementation, Congress has, in effect, served as an institutionalchampion for improving the management of the federal government,providing a consistent focus for oversight and reinforcement ofimportant policies. On an agency-specific basis as well, supportfrom the Congress has proven to be critical in instituting andsustaining management reforms, such as those taking place at IRS,GSA, and elsewhere across the federal government.Congress, in its oversight role, can monitor managementimprovement initiatives and provide the continuing attentionnecessary for reform initiatives to be carried through to theirsuccessful completion. Information in agencies' plans and reportsproduced under the Results Act, high quality financial and programcost data, and other related information, can help Congress intargeting its oversight efforts and identifying opportunities foradditional improvements in agencies' management. In this regard, wehave long advocated that congressional committees of jurisdictionhold augmented oversight hearings on each of the major agencies atleast once each Congress. Congress could examine, for example, thedegree to which agencies are building the elements of successfulmanagement improvement initiatives that we have discussed todayinto their respective management reform efforts. Such hearings willfurther underscore for agencies the importance that Congress placeson creating high-performing government organizations. Also, throughthe appointment and confirmation process, the Senate has an addedopportunity to make clear its commitment to sound federalmanagement and explore what prospective nominees plan to do toensure that their agencies are well-managed and striving to behigh-performing organizations.In summary Mr. Chairman, serious and disciplined efforts areneeded to attack the management problems confronting some of ourlargest agencies. Successful management improvement efforts oftencontain a number of common critical elements, including topleadership commitment and accountability, the integration ofmanagementPage 13 GAO/T-GGD-00-26improvement initiatives into programmatic decisions, planning tochart the direction the improvements will take, employeeinvolvement in the change efforts, organizational realignment tostreamline operations and clarify accountability, and congressionalinvolvement and oversight. Experience has shown that when theseelements are in place, lasting management reforms are more likelyto be implemented that ultimately lead to improvements in theperformance and cost-efficiency of government.Mr. Chairman, this concludes our prepared statement. We would bepleased to respond to any questions that you or other Members ofthe Subcommittee may have.Contacts and AcknowledgementFor further contacts regarding this testimony, please contact J.Christopher Mihm at (202) 512-8676. For information regarding GAO'swork on IRS modernization, please contact James R. White at (202)512-9110, and for information regarding GAO's work on GSA, pleasecontact Bernard L. Ungar at (202) 512-4232. Individuals making keycontributions to this testimony included Kelsey Bright, DeborahJunod, Susan Ragland, and William Reinsberg.Page 14 GAO/T-GGD-00-26 Page 15 GAO/T-GGD-00-26Ordering InformationThe first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free.Additional copies are $2 each. Orders should be sent to thefollowing address, accompanied by a check or money order made outto the Superintendent of Documents, when necessary. VISA andMasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or morecopies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25percent.Order by mail:U.S. General Accounting OfficeP.O. Box 37050 Washington, DC 20013or visit:Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and G Sts. NW)U.S. General Accounting Office Washington, DCOrders may also be placed by calling (202) 512-6000 or by usingfax number (202) 512-6061, or TDD (202) 512-2537.Each day, GAO issues a list of newly available reports andtestimony. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or anylist from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using atouchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how toobtain these lists.For information on how to access GAO reports on the INTERNET,send e-mail message with "info" in the body to:info@www.gao.govor visit GAO's World Wide Web Home Page at:http://www.gao.govBulk Rate Postage & Fees Paid GAO Permit No. G100United States General Accounting Office Washington, D.C.20548-0001Official Business Penalty for Private Use $300Address Correction Requested(410502)