Office of the General CounselB-274333September 12, 1996The Honorable Nancy Landon Kassebaum Chairman The HonorableEdward M. Kennedy Ranking Minority Member Committee on Labor andHuman Resources United States SenateThe Honorable Thomas J. Bliley, Jr. Chairman The Honorable JohnD. Dingell Ranking Minority Member Committee on Commerce House ofRepresentativesSubject: Department of Health and Human Services, Food and DrugAdministration: Regulations Restricting the Sale and Distributionof Cigarettes and Smokeless Tobacco to Protect Children andAdolescentsPursuant to section 801(a)(2)(A) of title 5, United States Code,this is our report on a major rule promulgated by Department ofHealth and Human Services, Food and Drug Administration, entitled"Regulations Restricting the Sale and Distribution of Cigarettesand Smokeless Tobacco to Protect Children and Adolescents" (RIN:0910-AA48). We received the rule on August 26, 1996. It waspublished in the Federal Register as a final rule on August 28,1996. 61 Fed. Reg. 44395.The rule prohibits the sale of nicotine-containing cigarettesand smokeless tobacco to individuals under the age of 18; requiresmanufacturers, distributors, and retailers to comply with variousconditions regarding the sale and distribution of these products;requires retailers to verify a purchaser's age by photographicidentification; prohibits all free samples; limits the distributionof these products through vending machines and self-servicedisplays by permitting such methods of sale only in facilitieswhere access by individuals under 18 is prohibited; limits theadvertising and labeling to which children and adolescents areexposed; prohibits promotional, non-tobacco items such as hats andtee shirts; prohibits sponsorship ofGAO/OGC-96-38sporting and other events, teams and entries in the brand nameof tobacco products; and requires manufacturers to provide intendeduse information on all cigarette and smokeless tobacco productlabels and in cigarette advertising.The rule is predicated on the Food and Drug Administration'sassertion of jurisdiction under the Federal Food, Drug and CosmeticAct over cigarettes and smokeless tobacco as delivery devices fornicotine. The lengthy jurisdictional determination was published inthe Federal Register on August 28, 1996, as an annex to the finalrule.The rule will become effective 1 year from the date ofpublication in the Federal Register except that the prohibitionregarding sale to any person younger than 18 years of age and therequirement for photographic identification to verify the age ofpurchasers will become effective 6 months after publication. Therestriction on event sponsorship and manufacturers' compliance withexisting device registration and listing requirements and goodmanufacturing practice requirements will become effective 2 yearsfrom publication.Enclosed is our assessment of the Food and Drug Administration'scompliance with the procedural steps required by sections801(a)(1)(B)(i) through (iv) of title 5 with respect to the rule.Our review indicates that the Administration complied with theapplicable requirements.If you have any questions about this report, please contactJames W. Vickers, Senior Attorney, at (202) 512-8210. The officialresponsible for GAO evaluation work relating to the Department ofHealth and Human Services, Food and Drug Administration is Sarah F.Jaggar, Director, Health Services, Quality and Public HealthIssues. Ms. Jaggar can be reached at (202) 512-7119.Robert P. Murphy General CounselEnclosurecc: The Honorable Donna E. Shalala The Secretary of Health andHuman ServicesPage 2 GAO/OGC-96-38ENCLOSUREANALYSIS UNDER 5 U.S.C.  801(a)(1)(B)(i)-(iv) OF A MAJOR RULEISSUED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, FOOD ANDDRUG ADMINISTRATION ENTITLED "REGULATIONS RESTRICTING THE SALE ANDDISTRIBUTION OF CIGARETTES AND SMOKELESS TOBACCO TO PROTECTCHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS" (RIN: 0910-AA48)(i) Cost-benefit analysisAn analysis of the costs and benefits of the rule was conductedby the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and published in thenotice of proposed rulemaking on August 11, 1995, and is containedin the preamble to the final rule. The analysis in the final rulehas been revised based on comments the FDA received and now alsoconsiders the costs and benefits associated with a rule issued bythe Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration(SAMHSA) on January 19, 1996, governing a program of State-operatedenforcement activities to restrict the sale or distribution oftobacco products to individuals under the age of 18. FDA considersthe two rules complementary and cannot separately quantify thebenefits of the two programs and since both rules work collectivelyto reduce youth access to tobacco products, the costs attributableto the SAMHSA program are included in the analysis.The analysis based its benefits on achieving the "Healthy People2000," a Department program, goal of reducing underage tobacco useby one-half in order to prevent over 60,000 early deaths. Theanalysis places a monetary value of these health benefits (at a 3percent discount rate) at an estimated $28 to $43 billion per year,including $2.6 billion in medical cost savings, $900 million inproductivity gains from reduced morbidity and $24.6 to $39.7billion per year in willingness-to-pay values for avertingpremature fatalities. The analysis states that if the 50 percentreduction in underage tobacco use is not reached and only 5 percentof the 1 million adolescents who become new smokers are deterred,the annual benefits would be $2.8 to $4.3 billion per year.FDA estimates the overall compliance costs of the rule to befrom $174 million to $187 million in one-time costs and $149million to $185 million in annual operating costs. These costs willbe borne by manufacturers ($78 to $91 million in one-time costs and$2 million in annual costs), retail establishments ($96 million inone-time costs and $78 million in annual costs), FDA ($3 to $5million in enforcement costs per year) and State governments ($25to $50 million per year in administering various SAMHSA enforcementprograms).GAO/OGC-96-38FDA recognizes that it could not quantify every regulatory costbecause of significant distributional and transitional effects ofthe rule. For example, lost sales experienced by suppliers ofadvertising were considered distributional impacts because thedollars not spent on advertising are not lost to the economy butwill be spent on other goods and services. Also, if State andFederal excise taxes remain at the current levels, tax revenueswill decrease over time because of decreased sales.In conclusion, the analysis finds that while compliance with therule will bring significant health benefits to the population andalso exact long-term revenue losses on the tobacco industry andshort-term costs on various affiliated industry sectors, thebenefits of the rule will greatly exceed the compliance costs onthe United States economy.(ii) Agency actions relevant to the Regulatory Flexibility Act,5 U.S.C.  603-605, 607 and 609The FDA has concluded that the rule will have a significanteconomic impact on a substantial number of small entities and aninitial regulatory flexibility analysis and final regulatoryflexibility analysis have been prepared and included in the noticeof proposed rulemaking and the final rule notice, respectively, asrequired by sections 603 and 604. The analyses comply with theinformational requirements of the sections including the classes ofsmall entities subject to the rule and alternatives considered toreduce the burden on the small entities.The final analysis discusses the FDA's decision not to exemptsmall entities from the rule because an exemption for smallretailers would shift underage sales to those locations, lesseningor eliminating the effectiveness and benefits of the accessrestrictions. However, a total ban on vending machines and directmail order sales have been deleted from the final rule because oftheir impact on small entities.The analyses use both quantifiable and general descriptions ofthe effects of the rule on small entities as required by section607 and numerous small entities participated in the rulemaking asrequired by section 609 by submitting comments on the proposedregulation following the inclusion in the notice of proposedrulemaking of the initial regulatory flexibility analysis whichdiscussed the economic impact on small entities.Page 2 GAO/OGC-96-38(iii) Agency actions relevant to sections 202-205 of theUnfunded Mandates Reform Act of 1995, 2 U.S.C.  1532-1535Based on the cost-benefit analysis performed by FDA, the rulewill impose an unfunded mandate on the private sector of over $100million annually and therefore the rule is subject to therequirements of the Act.As required by section 205, FDA considered regulatoryalternatives to the requirements of the rule but determined thatthe provisions of the final rule constituted the mostcost-effective and least burdensome alternative that would meet theobjective of the rule.The FDA rejected the regulatory alternative of a total ban onall tobacco advertising. Also, a more prescriptive requirement formanufacturers to monitor the sales and distribution of retailestablishments was not imposed because it would have imposed anadditional cost of $85 million per year. Finally, a requirement toinclude package inserts containing educational information incigarette and smokeless tobacco was not chosen because the FDA wasnot certain the benefits would justify the compliance costs.Section 204 requires that State, local and tribal governmentshave an opportunity for input and numerous comments were receivedfrom State and local governments, health departments, substanceabuse programs and law enforcement agencies. These comments werereviewed and considered as discussed in the preamble to the finalrule.(iv) Other relevant information or requirements under Acts andExecutive ordersAdministrative Procedure Act, 5 U.S.C.  551 et seq.The FDA promulgated the rule under the notice and commentprocedures of 5 U.S.C.  553 and its own agency regulationregarding the promulgation of regulations found at section 10.40 ofTitle 21 of the Code of Federal Regulations.On August 11, 1995, the proposed rule was published in theFederal Register (60 Fed. Reg. 41314) and in the same issue, adocument entitled "Analysis Regarding The Food And DrugAdministration's Jurisdiction Over Nicotine-Containing CigarettesAnd Smokeless Tobacco Products" was published and comments wererequested. 60 Fed. Reg. 41453. The comment period, following anextension, remained open for 144 days. In the months that followedthe publication of the proposed rule and during the comment period,the FDA made available to the public over 200,000 pages ofdocuments which were cited by the agency or considered in thepromulgation of the rule.Page 3 GAO/OGC-96-38The FDA received over 700,000 comments in response to theproposed rule. While the FDA reports many of the comments were formletters, there were over 95,000 distinct or unique comments filedwith the FDA.The preamble to the final rule discusses many of the commentsreceived and the action taken by the agency in response or why thecomments did not change the agency's position.Paperwork Reduction Act, 44 U.S.C.  3501-3520The proposed rule contained information collections which wouldhave required the manufacturers and retailers of cigarettes andsmokeless tobacco to use established names for cigarettes andsmokeless tobacco products, establish and maintain educationalprograms, observe certain formats and content requirements forlabeling and advertising and the submission of labels, labeling andadvertising to the FDA. The FDA solicited comments on the aboveinformation collections including among other information, thenecessity of the collection, the accuracy of the estimated burdenand ways to enhance the information collection.Following the receipt and evaluation of the comments, the FDAhas revised certain burden estimates and has deleted therequirement for the submission of labeling to the FDA and theestablishment of educational programs.The information collections in the proposed rule were approvedby the Office of Management and Budget under OMB No. 0910-0312.Because of the above noted changes to the collections, FDA hasresubmitted the matter to OMB for review and approval and prior tothe effective date of the rule, FDA will publish a notice in theFederal Register of OMB's action on the provisions.Statutory authorization for the ruleThe FDA has cited sections 502, 510, 518, 519, 520,701, 704 and903 of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C.  352,360, 360h, 360i, 360j, 371, 374 and 393) as authority for the ruleand in particular, the device provisions of the Act, including therestricted device authority in section 520(e) of the Act. 21 U.S.C. 360j(e).Executive Order No. 12866The rule was determined to be a "significant regulatory action"under Executive Order No. 12866 requiring review by the Office ofManagement and Budget, Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs(OIRA). OIRA approved the final rule on August 22, 1996, ascomplying with the requirements of the Order based on theinformation supplied by FDA, including a planned regulatory actiondocumentPage 4 GAO/OGC-96-38describing the reason for the rule and an assessment of thecosts and budgetary impact of the rule.Executive Order No. 12606 (Family)FDA considered whether the rule would have a significant impacton family formation, maintenance and general well-being as requiredby the Order and found that the rule would not have a negativeimpact in these areas. In the preamble to the proposed rule, it wasnoted that the rule would help the significant majority of familiesthat seek to discourage their children from using cigarettes andsmokeless tobacco. 60 Fed. Reg. 41356. FDA responds in the preambleto the final rule to several comments it received and maintains itsconclusion that the rule does not have a negative impact.Executive Order No. 12612 (Federalism)The rule was reviewed by the FDA under the Order which requiresFederal agencies to examine regulatory actions to determine if theyhave a significant impact on the States, on the relationshipbetween the States and the Federal government, and on thedistribution of power and responsibilities among the various levelsof government. In the preamble to the final rule, the FDA addressesthe various issues raised by commenters in this area, including thepreemption of State and local laws which are different from or inaddition to the requirements under the final rule; whether there isan infringement on the States' right to regulate tobacco andbusinesses within the State and protect the health of its citizens;the allocation of a State's resources and the rule's possibleimpact on the States' economies. The FDA concludes that thepreemptive effects of the final rule are consistent with theOrder.Executive Order No. 12630 (Property Rights)The FDA reviewed the rule under the Order and concluded that theaffect of the final rule would not constitute a "taking" of privateproperty. The preamble to the final rule discusses issues raised byvarious commenters in the areas of the use of self-servicedisplays, vending machines, restrictions on sponsorship of eventsexcept in the corporate name and loss of employment and maintainsits conclusion that there would be no "taking" under the Order. TheFDA's position is that reductions in personal property's value,even prohibitions on all economically viable uses, and financialexpenditures to comply with a regulatory requirement do notnecessarily establish a taking, citing various court decisions forsupport.The FDA did not identify any other statute or executive orderimposing procedural requirements relevant to the rule.Page 5 GAO/OGC-96-38