PRESENTATION OF RANDI YOUELLS, LSC VICE PRESIDENT FOR PROGRAMSFOR THE ONTARIO LEGAL AID SPEAKER SERIESThank you for inviting me to your wonderful Country and thebeautiful city of Toronto to talk with you about the subject thathas been the primary focus of my professional life over the lasttwenty-seven years-the provision of high quality legal services topeople who could not otherwise afford legal aid. As did many of youin this room, I started my legal aid journey fresh out of lawschool in 1975. As I was sworn in as a licensed attorney in thestate of Iowa-which is a small rural farming state located in themidwestern part of our country-I optimistically and mistakenlybelieved that my "life in legal services" would be a short one. Itruly believed that in my lifetime I would witness the eradicationof poverty and injustice. I believed that I would see the day whenno person-be they American or Canadian-would go hungry at night. Ibelieved to the very core of my soul that the human race was on thebrink of a new era in which intolerance and bigotry and prejudicewould no longer exist. But as we all know today that young womenwho started her life in legal services in 1975 full of hope andpromise-and just a wee bit nave-was not correct about what thefuture would hold.Today, in the offices of the Legal Services Corporation of Iowayoung attorneys are providing legal assistance to the children andthe grandchildren of the clients I tried to help 27 years ago.Today, in our country, hundreds of thousands of people live in ourstreets. Today, millions of children go to bed hungry at night.Today, just like 27 years ago, racial and ethnic bigotry remainsthe central reality of most of our clients' lives. Today-just likeyesterday-thousands of people daily knock on the door of legalservices and they are told, "no one is home. And that is thereality that brings us here on this beautiful September day.Because we are older and wiser-and perhaps more damaged and morebattle-scarred-we know that the promise of legal services has notbeen fulfilled. But perhaps because within all of us therecontinues to live younger more idealistic lawyers-a whisper of thelawyers we were at the beginning of our professional lives-we arehere today because we are not ready to let go of the "promise" oflegal services. We are not ready to call it quits. We are not readyto stop believing that we can build a world-class legal servicesdelivery system in both of our countries.That's what I will speak to you about today. Although most of myremarks will be devoted to the steps we have undertook within mycountry to revitalize a struggling legal services deliverysystem-steps that we often colloquially refer to as stateplanning-state planning has always been for me but a tool. Theoverarching goal has always been-and will always be-the creation ofworld class legal services delivery systems in which no client orpotential client is turned away. After all, in a democracy, thehalls of justice must always stand wide open and everyone must bewelcome to walk through them unimpeded and unchallenged.Let's start with a history lesson. Legal services programs inthe United States began in the 1960's as special model projectsinitiated by the federal government's Office of EconomicOpportunity. They were infused with the idealism and spirit of theKennedy years and strengthened by President Johnson's vision of aGreat Society. Under President Nixon, who signed the Legal ServicesAct of 1974, they became an institution and, over time, a familiarpart of the legal landscape in every U.S. state and territory.Until very, very recently, LSC programs were organized andoperated pretty much as they had a quarter of a century ago. Theywere locally focused and passionately promoted "local control."Many of the staff made legal services their careers. Some of theprograms' managers stayed with one program for their entireprofessional lifetimes. In some programs, board membershipterminated only with the member's death. The kinds of caseshandled, the strategies for addressing the legal needs of servicearea residents, and the client community itself remained prettymuch the same in most LSC programs until the 1990's. And, while theidealism and vision of a new world remained part of our mantra, itsplace of honor receded, as legal services became business as usualfor many grantees.Several events in the mid-1990's brought an end to this way oflife for the legal services community in my country. The Congress,which controls our funding levels, began to include many memberswho did not support the purpose and goals of a federal civil legalservices program. Consequently, funding appropriations diminishedor failed to keep up with the cost of living. Then, in the middleof the decade, a vigorous effort to do away with legal servicesresulted in a funding bill that carried significant restrictions,including one that prohibited programs from seeking attorney'sfees. Additional restrictions prevented our grantees from doingmuch of the work they had previously handled-representing prisonersin civil litigation, representing certain groups of immigrants,representing clients in class action lawsuits. The Congress alsotold LSC that it could not continue to fund its grantees"presumptively" and that it must begin to distribute its funds on acompetitive basis. This union of significant funding declines,restrictions and competition began to inexorably change the waythat legal services in the United States operate.As a funder and as an organization concerned with seeing thatlow-income people who struggle with critical civil legalemergencies such as evictions and domestic violence, have access tothe justice system, LSC was not willing to accept the "guide pathto oblivion" that some had designed for our future. In 1997, LSCbegan to initiate a series of efforts that we believed would ensurethat services to clients did not falter in a time of decreasingresources and limited opportunities. Needless to say, most of 'thefield,' as we refer to the collective entity that constitutes ourgrantee programs, was already frightened and concerned because ofthe funding drops, new restrictions and competition fears. When, in1998, LSC announced its intent to launch an initiative that wouldrequire massive restructuring of the national legal servicesdelivery system, the announcement was also quite frightening andwas not greeted, in many quarters, with open arms.So, what has LSC done to restructure the American legal servicesdelivery system since 1998? The most innovative and certainly themost difficult part of our strategy to move our grantees into newapproaches to serving clients-and the one that has received themost attention (both good and bad)-is the State Planning strategythat we launched in 1998. As it was conceived and as it has playedout, LSC's State Planning Initiative is anew visioni for legal services in which eligible clients inevery state are afforded an equal opportunity to avail themselvesand ultimately to attain high-quality civil legal assistance. In aneffort to foster more consistent levels of statewide service and toeliminate "service gaps" that leave clients in geographicallyremote areas underrepresented compared to their urban counterparts,LSC has asked each of its grantees to undergo a fundamentalparadigm shift in their program vision. Program leaders have beeninstructed to abandon the parochial thinking of "What's best forclients in my service area?" and asked instead to consider "What'sbest for clients throughout my state?" and ultimately, "What's bestfor clients throughout the United States".I think that it is important for you to know that LSC initiallystressed the importance of state planning in 1995 when it asked itsrecipients in each state to participate in the development of aplan for the design, configuration, and operation of LSC-fundedprograms in their states. The 1995 Program Lettersii were primarilydeveloped it response to funding cuts and restrictions that hadcrippled legal services in our country. These early planningdocuments laid the foundation for what was to come in 1998 in thatthey began to set forth a vision for legal services delivery andenumerated the issues and criteria that state planning shouldaddress. However, except for a handful of states, the 1995 callsfor state planning were largely ignored and to be honest LSC didlittle during this time period to promote nationwide strategicplanning.In 1998, the State Planning Initiative was re-initiated. LSCProgram Letters 1998-1iii and 1998-6iv directed programs to planfor the creation of comprehensive, integrated, coordinated legalservices systems and defined the terms of such systems. Granteeswere required to submit a report outlining their state plans byOctober 1, 1998. Their plans were to include responses to the seveninitial central tenets of State Planning:(1) development of intake, advice, and referral services; (2)effective usage of technology; (3) increased access to legalself-help and prevention information; (4) coordination of legalwork, training, information, and expert assistance; (5) engagementof pro bono attorneys; (6) development of additional state, local,and private resources; and (7) optimal configuration of serviceareas.LSC did not confine its "directives" to what a plan shouldinclude. It also laid out the parameters of the planning processitself. LSC instructed its grantee programs to collaborate with arange of local, state, and national stakeholders, including stateand local bar associations, Interest On Lawyers Trust Account(IOLTA) administrators, state judiciaries, client groups, pro bonocommissions, state legislatures, non-LSC-funded legal servicesprograms, and a host of others. LSC required its grantees in eachstate to work with each other and with other equal justicestakeholders to develop justice communities that best respond toclients' most compelling needs, ensure the most strategic andcost-effective use of all available resources, and maximize theopportunity for clients statewide to receive timely, effective, andappropriate legal services.In 1999, guided by the belief that access to quality legalservices is critical to a fair adversarial justice system andcommitted to making significant improvements in the delivery systemthe LSC Board of Directorsv approved and enacted its own strategicplan-Strategic Directions 2000-2005-which was adopted in January2000. The twin objectives of Strategic Directions 2000-2005 were todramatically increase the number of low-income Americans who canaccess the civil justice system and to ensure that all clientsreceive quality legal services. Strategic Directions 2000-2005 wasdeveloped as a forward-looking document. It reinforced the StatePlanning Initiative already in place by calling state planning its"most important strategy".In 1998, LSC's goal-a goal shared by many of our partners in theAmerican equal justice movement like the American Bar Associationand the National Legal Aid and Defender Association-was to obtain acritical mass of new ideas, funds and partners into the nationallegal services community, and to assist thousands of clients whowere being denied access to civil justice because funding wasdiminished, because programs were failing to keep up withtechnological and other innovations, and because many of ourgrantees worked in isolation within states and across state lines.This was a tremendous change for our grantees and for the deliverysystem that we funded. However, the state planning initiative wasalso a big change (as some would say, a huge paradigm shift) forLSC as an organization. For years LSC had defined itself by thevery traditional roles of funder and regulatory agency. The stateplanning initiative required LSC to become something different,transforming itself into an agent of change and an equity partnercapable of effecting large-scale reformation in a moribund deliverysystem. And, as any one versed in organizational psychology or evenexperienced in managing a large organization knows, suchtransformations do not come easy, they are seldom painless, andthey require the staff of the organization leading such atransformation to put themselves on the line in ways that often areunfamiliar and unpleasant. LSC was no exception and, today, withinthe walls of LSC you will find employees who still do notunderstand or support the state planning initiative. Indeed, inrecent internal budget battles within LSC, projects essential tothe creation of world class delivery systems- such as thedevelopment of a new measurement system to measure our work and thework of our grantees in terms of outcomes for clients and projectsto ensure that the delivery system is inclusive andmulti-culturally competent-were summarily removed from the firstdrafts of the budget by the staff who prepare the budget. Fundingfor these projects was ultimately restored, but not without theintervention of the LSC President and the Board of Directors. Andeven today, some staff-including staff that work for me-at timesmention that they do not support LSC's state planning initiativeand believe that our state planning work is beyond our centralmission. Fortunately, many other staff do not see it in the sameway.The creation of a world-class delivery system involved more than"state planning", per se. LSC also launched companioninitiatives-the quality initiative, the diversity initiative,technology initiative grants, to name just a few -that workedhand-in-glove with state planning to promote the development ofhigh-quality delivery systems. One of the most important companionprojects was and continues to be competition. At the same time thatLSC was launching its state planning initiative, Congress requiredLSC to cease funding its grantees "presumptively" and to begin tofund programs on a competitive basis. Today, LSC has been providingfunding on a competitive basis for seven years. In reality, therehas been very little actual "competition" for our federal funds.There are many reasons for this lack of "real competition." Firstand probably foremost, as we all know, providing high-quality legalservices to low-income persons is not as easy as it looks. Itrequires systems and practices and mindsets and commitments thatmay be foreign to many other non-profit providers of humanservices. Moreover, the fact that Congress has placed numerousrestrictions on legal services funding in the UnitedStates-restrictions that then attach to non-LSC funds-causes manyorganizations that might otherwise seriously consider applying forLSC funds to choose not to do so. However, the fact that thecompetition process has not resulted in widespread "competition"for funding does not mean that it has not been successful. Indeed,I feel that the competition process has been successful in waysthat I would not have ever envisioned when I was hanging out inlegal services programs in Iowa and New Jersey in the seventies,eighties and nineties. Why? Because the first step in setting up asystem of competition was to develop standards and benchmarks thatwe would use to evaluate programs and assess applicants'eligibility. And this was an important-and perhaps in Americanlegal services-quite revolutionary development. The fact thatbenchmarks exist means that there is a standard that all granteesmust meet before they are funded by LSC. It means that LSC has aregular means of gathering important qualitative and quantitativeinformation on all our grantees against which we can evaluate theirservices and their improvement. But it also means that there areaspirational goals for "perfection" that define a high-qualitylegal services program. We have found that many of our granteeswork hard to attain those aspirational goals. Competition wasdesigned to improve quality. And I think that will be its lastinglegacy; the fact that is has improved quality over the last sevenyears and it will continue to do so. Each year the legal servicesdelivery system in the United States gets better at the business ofcompetition as LSC refines and improves the process and as ourgrantees, individually and collectively, become the kinds ofhigh-quality legal services programs of which we can all beproud.Competition, in and of itself, is now a major tool used by LSCto develop a worldclass delivery system. We use it to push ourgrantees toward stronger and more aggressive delivery of servicesto clients. It allows us to create more forceful means ofconditioning our grants. It allows us to measure programperformance in more sophisticated ways. But linking competition tostate planning has expanded the impact of both of these initiativesin powerful ways that we were not able to envision in 1998. Let meexplain.When an applicant seeks federal funding from LSC and as theybecome grantees, they are required, as a condition of continuedfederal funding, to pursue state planning with all other LSC-fundedgrantees, The penultimate goals is the establishment of"communities of justice" in every state. The core elements of theplanning/competition link are as follows:Grantees must commit to not only providing quality legalservices within their service area but also to working with otherlegal services providers to develop a comprehensive, coordinated,integrated delivery system;Grantees must commit to join with other equal justicestakeholders to establish statewide delivery systemscapable-aspirationally-of serving every eligible client in a state,despite geographic, cultural and physical barriers thatexist;Grantees must commit to utilizing new technologies,self-help materials, new intake systems and multi-cultural staff toreach underserved clients;Grantees must prove to LSC that their service areaboundaries are as relevant to clients and their communities as whenthey were first "drawn" or they must work together and with us toredraw them;Grantees must work collaboratively with groups andorganizations they may have historically considered to becompetitors for scarce funds (such as other nonprofit human andsocial services agencies and non-LSC funded legal servicesprograms) or unlikely partners (judges, legislators, barleaders);Grantees must leverage additional resources to expandservices to lowincome person; andHere's the kicker-grantees must do all of this or riskthe loss of their federal funding.As I noted earlier, the state planning initiative was a hugeshift in thinking for the legal services community. But initially,most grantees thought that like many other projects begun by LSC,they only had to wait it out and it too would disappear into theozone or Ethernet or wherever legal services ideas go to find theireternal rest. But LSC quickly began to prove we were serious aboutplanning. We highlighted model systems in our literature andprogram visits. At LSC Board meetings, local events and nationalconferences, we showcased exemplary planning and implementation. Wedeveloped technical assistance funds for creative planning projectsand obtained a $15.6 million commitment from Congress to underwritesophisticated hardware, Web-based and telephonic systems to expandservices for clients. Internally, LSC staff worked aggressively tocalibrate units within the Programs Division so that everyprogrammatic effort advanced the creation of high-quality deliverysystems. For example, grant-award decisions and visits to assessprogram quality also focused on the efficacy of statewide systemsand collaborative efforts with other agencies serving the clientcommunity. As a result, over time, and with much gnashing of teeththe "elephant did begin to dance" and LSC, its grantees and thefederally-funded legal services delivery system began to evolvefrom a piecemeal, Great Society experiment to carefully chosennonprofit corporations working together to serve poor clients inevery jurisdiction.The most enduring legacy of the state planning initiative-atleast in terms of its first four years-has probably has been itssuccess in fostering cooperation among stakeholders. In 1998, 10states had designated state planning bodies dedicated tostrengthening legal services. Today, 36 states have such bodies;most others are in the midst of creating one. An essential functionof these bodies is establishing public-private coalitions tomaximize grantees' ability to leverage their federal investment.For example, last year in 2001, the engagement of judges,legislators and private bar members helped spawn appropriations forlegal services in 25 states totaling $68.5 million - almost threetimes more than states appropriated in 1997. Meanwhile, private barcampaigns quadrupled their fundraising from $5.3 million in 1997 to$23.6 million in 2001. Ten years ago when I was a legal servicesprogram director in Iowa, the private bar was either our adversaryor a somewhat disfavored cousin in the family of legal services.Just like families with unsavory family members, legal servicesprograms tolerated the presence of private lawyers in our pro bonomodels of delivery because we had to-not because we thought theywere doing anything useful. Today, in most parts of our country,the partnerships between legal services programs and the privatebar are deep and true. Private lawyers have an enhancedunderstanding of the importance of our work. We, in turn,understand the vital role they play in helping to assure that noclient goes unserved. Ten years ago, a judge was someone you sawbehind the bench when you went to court. Today, judges from alllevels, including Chief Justices of state Supreme Courts, speak outabout the need for quality legal services for poor Americans andwork with us to try to respond to the problems that are beingpresented to the United States justice system as a whole as thenumber of self-represented litigants grows exponentially.State Planning also has improved access for the fastest-growingclient subgroup: non-English speakers. Over the last several yearsLSC has partnered with other associations like the African-AmericanProject Directors Association to promote inclusion andmulti-cultural competency. Today, legal services advocates areincreasingly bilingual; 22 percent of employees at LSC-fundedprograms in my country speak more than one language. In addition,self-help, multilingual computer kiosks have overcome languagebarriers to help Native Americans living on reservations - andVietnamese and Spanish immigrants in California - enforce theirlegal rights without knowing a word of English.And I personally believe that the quality and effectiveness ofadvocacy also has improved over the last four years. The "primedirectives" of state planning emphasize quality, training, holisticlegal services and cross-program advocacy, and LSC and its granteeshave paid increasing attention to the quality of the services weprovide to our clients.How does this relate to Canada and, specifically, the initiativeyou propose to launch to address issues that trouble your legalservices system? Legal services programs in Canada are about thesame age as ours, and serve a similar client community. You face,just like us, certain problems:Insufficient funding;Outmoded delivery system;Changes in client community;Changes in the law;Technological changes; andThe need to prepare for the future.These are pretty serious problems. At times, they even appearinsurmountable. But that doesn't mean that we shouldn't try toaddress them in a proactive and "straight-on" manner. So I am goingto conclude my remarks today by offering you some guidance as yougive thought to launching your own planning initiative. Considerthem my personal lessons from six years in the planningtrenches:First, although our state planning initiative is highlyreplicable for any organization trying to effect rapid changeacross a large and entrenched culture of individual programs oroffices, such change is only possible if you are willing to beinclusive and collaborative in setting goals and processes, yetfirm and resolute in their ultimate enforcement.Second, it is going to require massive change not only amongyour providers in the field but within your own organization(s).Historically, LSC directives were seen by grantees as antitheticalto their mission, so they resisted change while nonethelessremaining largely dependent on the waning federal investment. Inorder to overcome this obstacle we had to change the way we didbusiness. We ramped up LSC's profile by visiting programs andparticipating in local meetings and national conferences to relayour message, hear reactions and improve relationships. And thissame consistent message was repeated over and over again by key LSCstaff wherever they traveled-including the President, the otherVice-Presidents, and the staff on the ground who were guidingstates through the planning process. You will have to be willing todo the same. You will need-all of you will need-to be highlyvisible personally and professionally. And you must recognize andaccept that doing so will take inordinate amounts of your time andyour energy.Third, you will-let me repeat that loudly and firmly-you WILLface resistance. Any effort to change a long-established systemwill meet resistance. That is inevitable.However, the good news is that you can slowly overcome thisresistance over time. But time-and timing-will be crucial. It won'thappen overnight and it won't happen without some setbacks. Wefailed when we pushed willing, but unprepared grantees toopportunities they were not ready to exploit. We also suffered morethan was necessary by not including willing grantees and otherequal justice stakeholders early on as our partners in the processof effectuating change. We didn't realize how long it was going totake before we would begin to see some successes. And then wefailed to celebrate those successes as important milestones andvictories. So, expect resistance. Commit to the long haul. Andcelebrate your intermediary successes along the journey.Fourth, tie planning to quality early on and stick with it.Planning is not an end. It is a means to an end and you mustclearly and consistently articulate the "end" that you envision.Talk quality all of the time. Vigorously promote those legalservices programs that provide high-quality legal assistanceholding them out as programs others should emulate. Establish andshare "best practices." Be willing to stick your neck out and holdconferences and meetings on quality issues of interest to the legalservices communities. In the last several years, LSC has hostednumerous conferences where advocates can share ideas, such asDiversity in the Legal Services Community, Making Mergers Work, andCreating Client-Centered Communities of Justice. Had we had moremoney we would have facilitated more conferences. They are animportant mechanism to bring people together to find-anddefine-common groundFifth, put your money where your mouth is. Set aside moneyspecifically for planning. Since 1999, LSC has awarded more than$800,000 in technical assistance funds for State Planning projects.And although we could have used lots more, this small sum did allowus to publicly recognize high-performers and promote planningmodels for others to emulate. But money is important for anotherreason. Planning has "costs" and you need to be seen as anorganization that understands those costs and is willing to helpgrantees and other stakeholders with some of the planningcosts.Sixth-Familiarize yourself with Sol Alinksy's Rules forRadicals. Not because you are going to use it. But because Mr.Alinksy lays out what you can personally expect to happen to you ifyou are in the forefront of this initiative. Mr. Alinksy instructshis readers to pick an issue, find an adversary and make itpersonal. And that may be you- at the wrong end of the personalattacks. So get psychologically prepared and don't be blind-sidedby the venom. Although your journey is going to be difficult and attimes you will doubt yourselves, the benefits to clients are wellworth it and the satisfaction of hearing even the most recalcitrantof adversaries say that the new system is better than the one thatwent before is deeply rewarding. And remember what your Grandmotherprobably said to you a long time ago-what doesn't kill you probablymakes you stronger.Seventh-Don't ignore the need to promote the value of planninginternally among all of your staff. One of the most stupid errorsthat LSC made as we kicked off an era of planning was not to takethe time-and expend the energy-to make other offices and unitswithin our own organization understand the importance of what wewere doing and their vital role in helping promote and developworld-class delivery systems. This set up needless competition forscarce resources and created hurt feelings among some staff.And, finally-keep your eye on the prize. Remember the person whofirst decided to go to law school, think about that young excitedlawyer starting his/her first job, remember the neophyte attorneynewly admitted to the practice of law who was excited, scared andenthralled about the future. We all cared deeply about justice whenwe started this journey. And we care deeply about it today or wewouldn't be here together in this room. We will settle for nothingless than a world-class delivery system. And although we are alittle older and slightly grayer and certainly more jaded, and weknow now that we won't see it happen in our lifetimes, we stillbelieve-I still believe-that our collective dream of a justicesystem that lets client walk through the doors of justice unimpededand unshackled, is a dream that we will achieve. One day. Together.Here in Canada. And in the United States.Thank you again for allowing me to be with you today.i Twenty-five years ago, our government made a pledge to helpensure that all persons have access to America's civil justicesystem by enacting legislation that created Legal ServicesCorporation. Over the past 27 years, LSC has helped millions oflow-income citizens solve important, sometimes life-threatening,civil legal problems. Despite the success of LSC and its manycontributions to access to justice for lowincome Americans, itsachievements are overshadowed by the fact that so many in oursociety continue to suffer injustice and are unable to gain accessto a lawyer for critical legal assistance. Until all members of oursociety are afforded that access, this promise of our governmentwill continue to be unfulfilled. LSC is committed to promoting anew vision of legal services that will achieve the goal of bringinglegal services to those currently denied access to the justicesystem.ii Program Letter 1995-1 directed LSC recipients to developplans to stretch scarce federal dollars in the most effective,efficient ways possible. The letter also anticipated the passage ofcongressional restrictions on the activities of LSC programs,prompting LSC to instruct its programs to forge deeper bonds withother stakeholders, including non-LSC funded programs, state andlocal bar associations, IOLTA administrators, the judiciary, andclient groups. Program Letter 1995-4 provided a general outline asto the issues and criteria that the state planning process shouldaddress. Significant emphasis was placed on the integration ofLSC-funded programs into statewide legal services delivery systemsand the seven central tenets of state planning were identified.iii Program Letter 1998-1, published on February 12, 1998,called upon all LSC recipients to analyze any progress made towardthe development of the legal services model envisioned by stateplanners. Programs were to evaluate whether all programs wereworking cohesively to assure that urgent clients needs were beingaddressed; whether sufficient capacities for training andinformation-sharing existed; whether programs were moving forwardon technology; and whether they were collaborating to increaseresources and develop new initiatives to expand the scope of theirservices. Grantees were also asked to examine whether the existingprogram configuration was conducive to the most effective statedelivery system. Grantees were asked to examine their progress ineach of the seven principal areas of State Planning in a mannerthat included assessing the strengths and weaknesses of the currentapproach, establishing goals to strengthen and expand services toeligible clients, and determining the major steps yet to be takenand a timetable necessary to achieve those goals. LSC set adeadline of October 1, 1998, for submission of state planningreports.iv Program Letter 1998-6, published on July 6, 1998, respondedto recipient requests for guidance and additional information onwhat was expected in their state planning reports. It included"State Planning Considerations" designed to address requests foradditional information regarding statewide goals, capacities, andapproaches recipients should consider in their state planningprocesses. Program Letter 1998-6 stated that the State PlanningInitiative will provide information to aid LSC in exercising itsstatutory responsibility to "insure that grants and contracts aremade so as to provide the most economical and effective delivery oflegal assistance to persons in both urban and rural areas."v LSC is headed by an 11-member board of directors, appointed bythe President, and confirmed by the Senate. By law, the board isbipartisan and no more than six members may be of the samepolitical party.