MEMORANDUMTO: LSC Board of Directors FROM: Randi Youells, Vice Presidentfor Programs DATE: January 8, 2002 SUBJECT: Strategic Directions2000-2005I am pleased to submit to you our report concerning the progressof the programs' units and offices-primarily OPP and the StatePlanning Team with some statistical and reporting assistance fromOIM-in terms of meeting the goals and objectives of your strategicplanning document, Strategic Directions 2000-2005.I would like to put this report in its proper perspective. Weare all acutely aware that our civil legal services delivery systemis strained to the breaking point. Legal services programsnationally have been battered by economic pressures and escalatingdemand. Our grantees now estimate that they currently turn awayfour out of every five low-income individuals who are seekingcritical legal assistance. Courts are witnessing an unprecedentedincrease in the number of people who enter the justice system todaylacking legal representation and who are consequently forced torepresent themselves in complex and complicated legal proceedings.Our communities are experiencing unrelenting pressures asunresolved civil legal problems result in homelessness, loss ofself-sufficiency and growing crime rates. Despite the hard work andthe advancements of the last thirty years, economic and socialinequality coupled with racial and gender-based discriminationcontinues to be the central reality of our clients' lives. The factthat we are now seeing second and third generation low-incomepeople walk through our doors and sit in our waiting rooms is abrutal reminder that the realization of justice for many Americansremains more an aspiration than a fact.LSC and our grantees live and work in a world that is marked bycontinual challenges and crises. That is the bad news. The goodnews, however, can be found in reports like this one. Reports thatdemonstrate that there are many people both within LSC and ourgrantee programs and outside of our federally-funded structure whocare deeply about issues related to equal justice and who haverefused to take our many crises lying down. People like the staffat the legal services programs in New Jersey, Maryland, Washington,Texas, Missouri, California, and Indiana who are actively andcontinuously engaged in reassessing their delivery practices andpolicies to meet emerging and unmet needs. People like those legalservices heroes in Arkansas, Illinois, Florida and Alabama who haveworked closely and in partnership with LSC to expand access to andenhance resources for legal services providers and their clients.People like my legal services friends in Iowa, Ohio, Virginia,Arizona and Kentucky who have devoted years of their lives to thelegal services movement. People like yourselves who in this era ofdiminishing resources and escalating need have devoted time andenergy to strengthening legal services and helping to makeessential changes in that way we practice legal services so that wecan ensure that the phrase "justice for all" is not relegated to asexy slogan on a t-shirt or a banner.This report demonstrates that our grantees and the broader equaljustice community are doing great things for clients and are doingit more efficiently and effectively with fewer resources. But forme it demonstrates another very important point. It shows that asmall group of committed individuals, the fourteen lawyers and fivenon-lawyers professionals working in OPP and on the State PlanningTeam (Michael Genz, Robert Gross, Anh Tu, Tim Watson, CyndySchneider, Reginald Haley, Melissa Pershing, Althea Hayward, WillieAbrams, John Eidleman, Barb Donnelly, Monica Holmen, Joyce Raby,Glenn Rawdon, Jennifer Bateman, Lou Castro, Lisa Thomas, GloriaWood) and Pat Hanrahan and Wendy Burnette in the Executive Office(aided and abetted by John Meyer and his wonderful staff inOIM)-terrific, hard-working, experienced, conscientiousindividuals-are the heart and soul of LSC. Without them breathinglife into your strategic plan, you would simply have a meaninglessreport that would be gathering dust on a shelf down in ourReprographics department.I think this report shows that we have had an inordinatelyproductive and successful year. But we didn't do it alone. We didit with the help of the Board and the other staff at LSC. We did itwith the help and assistance of our grantees. We did it with theaid of consultants and other equal justice stakeholders. And we didit with the support of two terrific Presidents-John McKay and JohnErlenborn-who evidenced their commitment and support for theprogram's initiatives in this document with their helpful advice,their useful feedback, their sometimes annoying challenges andcriticisms, and ultimately their unswerving support for us, for ourgrantees and for the clients we are so privileged to serve.Strategic Directions 2000-2005 Progress ReportStrategic Directions 2000 - 2005 challenges LSC staff to expandthe support offered to LSC programs and to increase state planningguidance specifically to improve clients' opportunities to access afull range of high quality civil legal services. In response, staffhas grown in size and capacity. The Office of InformationManagement (OIM), the Office of Program Performance (OPP), and theState Planning Team are now completely staffed. In 2001, OPP andthe State Planning Team focused their hiring activities onrecruiting individuals with expertise in critical areas likediversity, technology, and organizational development. Innovationsin staff assignments and approaches have brought about more focusedstate planning efforts throughout the country and program supportthat emphasizes strengthening quality at individual organizationsand within the state legal services delivery structure.GOALSStrategic Directions 2000-2005, adopted by the LSC Board ofDirectors January 28, 2000, establishes two strategic goals:By 2004, LSC will dramatically increase the provision of legalservices to eligible persons, which anticipates as outcomes:Increasing numbers of clients receiving appropriateservices.Expanding relevancy of delivery systems to the most pressingneeds, with clients taking a leading role.Increasing perception among low-income individuals that theyhave recourse if they require civil legal information, counseling,or representation.Increasing the public perception of the legal system assuccessful in providing equal justice.Expanding federal funding and other public and private resourcesfor legal services.By 2004, LSC will ensure that eligible clients are receivingappropriate and high quality legal assistance, which anticipates asoutcomes:Expanding range, and improvement in the quality, ofservices provided by programs.Increasing consistency in the quality of legal servicesprograms.Achieving significant beneficial results for clients asdetermined by outcome measurements.STRATEGIESIn order to achieve these goals, LSC is utilizing integratedstrategies based in three essential areas: 1) State Planning, 2)Technology, and 3) Program Oversight:USE OF STATE PLANNING to integrate, coordinate, and increaseresources available in every state and territory. Objectivesinclude:Identifying the most important issues involving thedelivery in all 50 states, territories and DC.Identifying the adequacy of existing capacities and existingfunding to address issues of access and quality.Expanding legal capacity through coordination with otherproviders.Recommitment to the provision of services to Native Americansand migrant workers.Developing programmatic and financial capabilities to reach moreclients with a wider range of services.USE OF TECHNOLOGY to improve access and client service delivery.Objectives include:Expanding the number of clients receiving some level ofappropriate legal advice and referral via technologicallysophisticated intake advice and referral systems.Providing consistent, quality information and assistance to agreater number of persons through computerized and web-based selfhelp programs.Supporting quality advocacy via video/teleconferencing, improvedlegal research and information gathering, improved supervision andexpanded training opportunities through technology.Fostering new or expanded linkages with the providers, courts,pro bono attorneys, and others working to provide legalrepresentation.USE OF PROGRAM OVERSIGHT to ensure quality and accountability.Objectives include: Improving the grant management process toutilize the information received to provide standards-basedfeedback to programs.Undertaking regular visits to programs to ensureconsistent program quality and compliance.Developing new information systems that provide more accurateand useful information about the work programs perform which can beused for both evaluation and grants management.Working with grantees in each state to develop systems andprocedures to ensure that legal services program staff receiveappropriate training and that the work in each state is performedin a coordinated manner.Working with grantees and planners in each state to promoteleadership training, including local board training, and to promoteclient board member participation and training (outreach to clientleaders).LSC COMMITMENTS ACHIEVED IN 2001USE OF STATE PLANNINGCommitment: Broad agreement by the civil justice community,including the courts and IOLTA programs, on the values, purposes,and objectives of the State Planning Initiative.2001 AchievementsIn March of 2001, LSC released Building State JusticeCommunities: a State Planning Report from the Legal ServicesCorporation. This publication examined state planning in 18 statesas models for building various components of a clientcentered,comprehensive, integrated state justice community.In April, LSC announced significant changes in serviceareas of 14 states.A Special Report to Congress on State Planning andReconfiguration was released late in the year, along with the LSCBoard Taskforce Report on Configuration, adopted by the LSC Boardof Directors in November.In a number of states, additional resources are now availablefor civil legal assistance:Successful efforts by the Tennessee Alliance of LegalServices (the state planning entity) to have bail bond feelegislation passed will result in an additional $2.5 million instate funds for legal service programs. In western Tennessee, acollaboration by two programs will bring over a million dollars inUS Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) fair housinggrants to Tennessee.The Illinois Equal Justice Commission (Illinois stateplanning body) has begun a campaign to secure additional IllinoisGeneral Assembly funding for legal services. A two-year effort formore state funding raised $70,000 to hire a public relations firmto coordinate the campaign. An additional $90,000 is expected overthe next two months from corporate donors andfoundations.The three LSC-funded programs in Alabama have hired astatewide Director of Development, an experienced fundraiser whopreviously worked with the Red Cross and the Girl Scouts. The majorchallenge is the Alabama Campaign for Legal Services, where aconsultant retained by the three programs did initial preparation.These early efforts were funded by a special grant from theAmerican Bar Association Litigation Section ($10,000) and matchingLSC technical assistance funds ($5,000) augmented by a $5,000contribution made on a pro rata basis by the three programs. LSCcurrently provides over 90% of the funding for legal services inAlabama, and realization of the need for diverse funding isprompting the state justice community to create a developmentoffice that will seek diverse funding for legal services inAlabama. In the first year of the campaign over $50,000 was raised,almost entirely from the legal community.The South Dakota State Bar has agreed to house the newAccess to Justice Coordinator position funded by IOLTA. Access tojustice is of paramount importance for this year's Bar president.South Dakota's LSC programs have jointly applied for US Departmentof Justice Violence Against Women Act funds. This is the first timethey have collaborated on a funding application that will benefitthe entire state.Florida undertook a successful effort to persuade theFlorida Supreme Court to amend the IOTA rule. The amended rule willresult in banks paying higher interest rates on IOTA accounts,which could yield an additional $15 million dollars in IOTArevenues. The President of the Florida Bar is leading a FloridaJustice Community campaign to obtain a minimum of $10 milliondollars a year from the Florida Legislature. At present, theFlorida Legislature does not fund civil legal services for thepoor.Commitment: Internal capacity and expertise to supportmeaningful planning and plan implementation consistent with thevalues, purposes, and objectives of the State PlanningInitiative.2001 AchievementsWith the hiring of three fulltime program counsel oranalysts in the last six months, the state planning team is nowfully staffed (in terms of the 2001 budget). All state planningteam members have significant field program and legal servicesleadership experience. Among the five-fulltime state planning teammembers (Barbara Donnelly, Robert Gross, Althea Hayward, MelissaPershing and Timothy Watson) and two part-time consultants (ChuckCook and Joseph Dailing) there is a total of 260 years of fieldprogram experience.1State planning-related program visits took place inAlabama, Georgia, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Mississippi, Missouri,Montana, Nevada, New Jersey, New York, North Dakota, Oklahoma,Oregon, South Carolina, and South Dakota.LSC executive and state planning staff were present andparticipated in community stakeholder meetings or statewideconferences in Alabama, Arkansas, California, Colorado,Connecticut, Florida, Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky, Michigan, Ohio,South Dakota, Tennessee, Virginia and Washington state. Staff alsoattended meetings of the Midwest Project Directors Association andSoutheast Project Directors Association during the course of theyear.Technical Assistance funds were given to assist mergingprograms in Arkansas, Iowa, North Dakota, and Pennsylvania.National initiatives undertaken or completed in 2001include:"Making Mergers Work" workshop at the national NLADA/ABAEqual Justice Conference in March.Diversity in the Legal Services Community conversations tookplace throughout 2001 involving groups of program directors, staff,clients, and board members from throughout the legal servicescommunity.1 Now that each unit is fully staffed, the LSC Office of ProgramPerformance and its state planning team contain over 260 years ofexperience in LSC-funded programs. Many staff also have experiencein other nonprofit organizations that work as partners with ourgrantees, such as bar associations, non-LSC funded legal servicesproviders and social welfare advocacy groups. In all, there are 14lawyers on OPP and state planning staff. Their efforts are enhancedby five other individuals who are not attorneys and two permanentpart-time consultants. Their combined expertise includes resourcedevelopment, organizational management, technology, migrant andimmigration law, access and intake systems. Prior to coming to LSC,six staff were executive directors at their legal services programsand three were managing attorneys. Two staff from the LSC ExecutiveOffice assist OPP and the state planning team members on a regularbasis, and add almost forty years of experience in LSC-fundedprograms to the rich mix of talents.LSC has scheduled a meeting with its statewide granteesfor February 7-9, 2002. This meeting initially was scheduled forSeptember 13-15, 2001.Client-Centered Conference, April 25-28 in Hershey,Pennsylvania. Fifty-one conferees included 22 clients, 18 legalservices staff, and 11 others including judges and IOLTA staff and16 organizational representatives from LSC, NLADA, and CLASP.Participants authored twenty papers that were distributed at theconference.Client Board Member Training at the 2001 NLADA AnnualConference.Commitment: LSC's grant making and regulatory authority promotesexpanded, effective, and efficient state and local legal servicesto low income persons.2001 AchievementsGrantees in 11 states received the maximum grant term ofthree years. Arizona, Arkansas, California, Illinois, Kentucky, NewMexico, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, and WestVirginia received three-year terms as an acknowledgement of their"significant progress toward the development of comprehensive,integrated delivery systems."Grantees in 10 states received two-year grant terms (2002and 2003) for demonstrating significant progress, though stillneeding additional state planning. Those states are Alabama,Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Mississippi, Montana,New York (except for Legal Services of New York City which willreceive a three-year grant), North Carolina, andOklahoma.Programs in Michigan and the District of Columbia receivedone-year grant terms for 2002. LSC is in the process of a one-yearreview of its prior reconfiguration decision in Michigan.Grant conditions, riders, or reporting requirements are beingadded to a number of grant awards to ensure continued broad-based,inclusive state planning.Program Letter 2000-7 was sent to the field at the end of 2000calling on each state to evaluate and report on their stateplanning progress. Reports began arriving late this year and arebeing reviewed; LSC responses will be sent in early 2002.USE OF TECHNOLOGYCommitment: Statewide technology plans required as part of theState Planning Initiative.2001 AchievementsIn 2001, LSC continued to play an active role in encouraging andsupporting states' technology plans.LSC assisted several states by participating in planninggroups and providing training on technology at statewide trainings.Some of the states were Oklahoma, Virginia, Arkansas, Nebraska,Missouri, Mississippi, and West Virginia.Technology grants assisted implementation of state plans. Threegrants in Texas helped with merger issues through integration ofdisparate systems. Grants made to Arkansas and Virginia aided incoordination of case management systems and building systems forstatewide client intake.Twenty-eight grants targeted statewide web sites, whichencompass not only all of the LSC programs in a state, but otherstate justice community partners.Five national technology grants were made to assist states withthe implementation of other technology grants and technologyplanning. (These national grants are described in detail below.)Among them were:A grant to support for implementation and contentmanagement of statewide web sites.A grant to link technical expertise from other programsto technology grantees at no cost to grantees.A grant to create a web site to provide information ontechnology for all LSC programs.Commitment: Technology and Pro Se initiative grants to beawarded by LSC.2001 AchievementsNinety-five Technology Initiative Grant (TIG) requestswere received from 46 states and territories for a total of $19.2million. Fifty-five grants were awarded, with $7 million allottedfor TIG 2001. Twenty-eight states received grants for statewidewebsites, 13 for technology projects being undertaken on astatewide basis (including three for statewide intake systems).Five grants with a national scope were awarded (see below).A TIG conference was held in Chicago in October to introducethis year's grantees to the national support system that LSC hasdeveloped, with the assistance of numerous grantees. These fivenational support grants will give our grantees more resources thanthey have ever had available to them for developing pro se toolsfor clients. The first two, LSTech and LegalMeetings, will beavailable to all LSC grantees, not just TIG recipients.In the first national system, Legal Services of SouthernMichigan is creating a national web site (www.lstech.org) withresources on legal services technology. They will be workingclosely with NTAP so that grantees with questions can log onto theweb site and request assistance from NTAP. Other partners on thisgrant are the University of Michigan, providing servers, and NLADA,providing content and technical assistance.The next grant is for a national legal services virtualconferencing center to be coordinated by Gulf Coast Legal Servicesin Houston. Using WebEx hosting services, our grantees will be ableto meet electronically via the web. Grantees can convene technologytrainings, state planning sessions, and advocates meetings. Thesite that will facilitate this project iswww.legalmeetings.org.A third national system grant, earmarked for the Legal AidSociety of Cincinnati, will help grantees with project evaluations.Our grantee, working with the Management Information Exchange andexperts on evaluations will create a national evaluation strategyto ensure that our grants improve access for clients to the fullestextent possible.Building on work undertaken by last year's grantees, LSC hasapproved grants to create 29 new statewide web sites. The majoritywill be housed on Pro Bono Net using their LawHelp template. Toassist programs with implementing these web sites, the NorthwestJustice Project and ProBonoNet in New York are hiring two full-time"circuit riders" to assist grantees with content management and toensure that each web site supports the entire state justicecommunity.The National Technology Assistance Project (NTAP) coordinated bythe Legal Aid Society of Orange County will help grantees withmanagement or technology issues arising from their grants.In addition, presentations on TIG funding availability and theapplication process took place at the National Equal JusticeConference, the Southeastern Project Directors Association meeting,the Indiana Access to Justice Conference and Virginia's technologyplanning meeting.Commitment: Working with grantees, LSC has developed anddisseminated replicable models for the effective and efficient useof technology.2001 AchievementsWith TIG 2000, grants were made for two statewide website templates. The theory behind these templates was to create astructure that could be replicated by other states with all of thefunctionality, but at a fraction of the cost. In TIG 2001, thesetemplates will be used in 28 states. The cost to implement thetechnology portion is only 20% of the each grant ($10,000). Theremainder will be used to coordinate content. This is a goodexample of how LSC's coordinating efforts can result in largesavings to our programs from replication.Another tool being used for replication is the nationalgrant for the technology web site (LSTech, described above). Onthis site, any program can find details on all of the technologygrants and avoid the expense and effort of creating new projectsfor their states. There will be technical information on satelliteInternet access, video systems, telephone, and a host of othersubjects.LSC co-sponsored a case management system conference inconjunction with the Equal Justice Conference and participated in asession on how to help advocates and staff use the technology toolsthey already have.Staff regularly confer with National Center for State Courts,State Justice Institute, the Open Society Institute and JusticeManagement Institute to facilitate pro se efforts, specificallyencouraging partnerships among our programs, the state courts, barassociations and community organizations. Meetings are alsoconducted with the National Access to Justice Funders Group (LSC,Open Society, State Justice Institute, National Center for StateCourts and the Horowitz Foundation) on building broader justicecommunities, statewide web sites, follow-up to the Pro SeCollaboration Conference, technology support systems andmulti-lingual access.In addition to the national grants and the statewide website grants, statewide grants were made to Virginia, Arkansas, andNebraska to improve their intake and delivery systems. Virginia andArkansas will be implementing single point of entry for all clientsinto the intake system, even though each program will be doing itsown intake. Their case management systems will be running on anapplications service provider (ASP). This means that no softwarewill be needed to access their system, opening up the ability to dointake from any computer with Internet access. This will help themexpand intake, such as allowing pro bono attorneys to do intakefrom their offices.Through our planning efforts, LSC is seeing many mergersof programs. To help with these mergers, LSC made severaltechnology grants to help programs combine multiple informationsystems into one integrated system. Examples of these are the threegrants to each of the new programs in Texas.As well as making new grants, staff continue to monitorthe TIG projects from last year. The Minnesota and Ohio grants todevelop web templates are being used as models for this year'sstatewide web site grants. The Orange County I-CAN project wassuccessfully completed and is being expanded with additional moniesthis year. This project, working with the Courts, districtattorney's office, and libraries, placed self-help kiosks inseveral locations in Orange County. The project has been so helpfulto clients and the courts that the Court system is examining theproject to see if it should be implement statewide. Hawaii's videoproject is completed and operational. This project is used toconnect offices in the other islands to the main LASH office inHonolulu. This allows them to do follow-ups on their pro se clinicsto insure they continue with the high success rates. LSC is sharingwhat has been learned about the project with other interestedprograms. DNA's satellites are providing high speed Internet accessto all of their offices. Before, many offices had to dial longdistance numbers to connect at very slow speeds. They areinstalling their pro se kiosks and designing the web site that willallow persons throughout their service area to obtain self-helpinformation in their native tongues.Commitment: State Technology Planning Manual developed anddisseminated.2001 AchievementsThe purpose of the Technology Planning Manual is toprovide executive directors, technologists and/or technologymanagers with a step-by-step guide to successfully creating astatewide technology plan. The Manual will identify the main issuesinvolved in planning successfully for technology and will captureinformation on planning, technology standards, legal servicesissues, and partner communities.The proposed Table of Contents is as follows:(1)Introduction (purpose of the manual, how to use it,overview)(2)Process of Planning (staffing the group, identifyingconstituencies, timeline, funding the effort)(3)Components of a Written Work Plan (state technologysupport structure, standards in key technology areas, i.e. LAN/WAN,hardware, software, connectivity, email, training, videoconferencing, etc.)(4)Implementation of the Work Plan (status tracking,training, evaluations, periodic reports, staffing on-going support,funding statewide efforts)(5)Funding (success stories, budgets,partnerships)(6)Other Resources for Help (website links to otherresources and individuals)Using the national NTAP grant (see above) LSC isgathering information from experts within the legal servicescommunity to prepare this manual. We believe disseminating thebroad experience of this group of experts will be useful for stateplanners and technology managers. There was a planning meeting todiscuss the preparation of this manual at the TIG 2001 conferencein Chicago and soon we will have a timetable for itscompletion.Use of Program OversightCommitment: Develop methods to assess program quality, to ensurethat case handling staff are well trained and that the legal workamong programs is coordinated and of high quality.2001 AchievementsLSC uses three primary tools to assure quality in theprograms that it represents:The competition process;Quality review visits; andProvision of support and technical assistance to itsrecipients.In 2001 the Corporation again used the competitionprocess to review programs assure quality. LSC's competitioncriteria have been refined to ensure that LSC recipients respondand adhere to performance standards that result in effective legalservices for low-income people. An extensive guide has beendeveloped for evaluations that considers each criterion andprovides reviewers with standards against which to judge fundingapplications.In 2001, LSC created a protocol for on-site programsreviews, published as a "Program Review Guide." It is a referencetool for staff and consultants in reviewing programs and to draftreports and recommendations based on the reviews. Program reviewsare one way to monitor program development, solve problems, andestablish new strategies for expanding access and enhancingquality. Among other resources, the Guide contains a sample letterintroducing the program to the review process, a comprehensive listof items to request prior to a visit; a simplified work form tocapture information while on site; a model work plan, a form tohelp determine the quality of the legal work and suggestions forconducting personal interviews. The implementation of the programreview process is discussed in the next section.LSC engages in other efforts to increase quality. LSCpersonnel are frequently asked by grantees for assistance withvarious aspects of running a successful program. LSC can be a linkbetween the person making the request and otherprograms that have addressed the same concern. In 2001, LSCbegan to systematize this effort by creating the InformationManagement Project. The project's purpose is to obtain andpublicize information on model practices, programs, and systems. Astaff member is engaged full-time in launching this effort.Other activities that support increasing program qualityundertaken in 2001 are:Producing Draft Characteristics on Intake, Advice, andReferral System. LSC developed and distributed the document to thepublic for comment; it will be final early in 2002.Contracting with the National Center of Poverty Law (NCPL) toprovide training on legal research for poverty law practice tolegal services attorneys in ten states selected by LSC, and towrite and distribute a desktop research manual on poverty law.Commitment: Undertake a series of program evaluation performancepilot projects that are intended to provide in-depth understandingof unique issues facing each program, more relevant and accuratereporting of program activities and resource utilization,performance measures that describe and project program success,information that will lead to an improvement of the overalleffectiveness and efficiency of service delivery.2001 AchievementsThe Office of Program Performance conducted twelve on-siteprogram reviews in 2001. Under review were programs in Florida,Alabama, Arkansas, New Jersey, Nevada, Pennsylvania, Oklahoma,Massachusetts, and Ohio. OPP also organized a peer review of theVeterans Consortium Pro Bono Program. These reviews allowed us tomonitor program development, to learn about problems and to suggestnew strategies for expanding access and enhancing quality.Commitment: Design a new management information system to obtainmore complete and accurate information about the quality and levelof work performed by each grantee and about outcomes achieved forclients.2001 AchievementsIn 2001, LSC devised a method to measure other significantresponsibilities that programs undertake to help clients, inaddition to handling client cases. These "matters" consist ofactivities such as pro se work, community legal education, andanalyzing client problems for referral to other resources. Programshave been counting "matters" since July 1, 2001. LSC's first reporton this activity is due in March of 2002.The 2001 Grant Activity Report (GAR) cycle, including CaseService Reports (CSR's) and the allied Self-Inspection process, hasbeen successfully completed.The results of the Self-Inspection show a great improvement inthe accuracy of CSR submissions, with the error rate reduced 55%,from an 11% error rate for 1999 CSR's to a 5% error rate for 2000CSR's. With this reduction in error rate, the CSR's now meet thestandard of "substantial accuracy" which was the objective when LSCinitiated the Self-Inspection process in 1998.The total cases reported to LSC for 2000 are 1,012,368.While this total is nominally a slight reduction from the 1,038,714reported for 1999, it is actually an increase because LSC had toadjust the 1999 total downward to 924,000 cases to take account ofthe high error rate. With the great improvement in the accuracy for2000, LSC can return to using the reported figures without anyadjustment.Commitment: Performance standards will include criteria forensuring that grantees have effective administrative systems inplace and that clients receive quality assistance. LSC will provideregular feedback to programs and applicants on the quality of theirapplications.2001 AchievementsLSC has developed performance guidelines for assessinggrant applications. These guidelines, embodied in the LSCCompetition Evaluation Guide, cover all aspects of programperformance including components of the delivery approach,management, legal work supervision, identifying and establishingthe most critical legal needs, coordination within the deliverysystem, and experience and reputation. They track, and are built onthe LSC Performance Criteria and ABA Standards for Providers ofCivil Legal Services to the Poor. In Spring 2002, LSC will publishthese guidelines. Following the competition for 2003, LSC intendsto inform each applicant about how well their program met eachcriterion.Commitment: Review the competitive grant making process, theperformance standards applicable to LSC grantees, and LSC'sstatutory and regulatory compliance requirements for efficiency,unnecessary duplication and implications for the delivery of highquality, appropriate legal services.2001 AchievementsAdditions to the 2002 Request for Proposal (RFP) includequestions for applicants on staff diversity, recruitment andretention strategies and training, and the organization's strategicplanning. RFP inquiries on technology and on state planning werestreamlined. Some modifications resulted in more comprehensiveinformation on applicants' proposed subgrantee relationships. LSCstaff conducted telephonic Applicant Information Sessions ordiscussions on the application process with interested grantees andexperts. Another comprehensive review of the competition process isscheduled for the beginning of 2002.Commitment: LSC will seek additional funds to increase thepresence of LSC staff in the field.2001 AchievementsWith the hiring of new state planning team members as wellas the additions of Matilde Lacayo and Monica Holman to OPP Mainand Joyce Raby in Technology, there is now an OPP Main team memberand a state planning team member assigned to every state andterritory. Staff are also able to assume special initiatives andprojects and to participate in national, regional and statewidemeetings and conferences.ADDITIONAL PROGRAM OUTCOMES ACHIEVED IN 2001The Development of a State Planning Evaluation InstrumentAn RFP was created, proposals reviewed and a consultant hired in2001 to design a state justice community outcomes measurement tool.Soon LSC will be in a position to quantitatively evaluate theimpact of state planning; for now we will demonstrate that stateplanning activities have caused beneficial outcomes for statejustice communities, outcomes that position programs toachieve:Increased number of clients receiving appropriate legalservices.Expanded relevancy of the delivery system to the most pressingneeds of lowincome clients Increased perception among low-incomeindividuals that they have recourse if they require civil legalinformation, counseling or representation.Increased public perception of the legal justice system assuccessful in providing Equal Justice.Expansion of federal funding and other public and privateresources dedicated to meeting civil legal needs of eligiblelow-income clients.Expanded range and improved quality of services provided bylegal services programs.Greater consistency in the quality of legal servicesprograms.Significant beneficial results for low income clients, asdetermined by outcome measurements.The Creation of Efforts to Link with the International JusticeCommunityLSC has moved into a leadership position in theinternational legal aid community. In June 2001 and again inDecember 2001, LSC Vice President for Programs Randi Youellsparticipated in conferences that brought together leaders andvisionaries from the legal services community in common lawcountries (Australia, England, New Zealand, Scotland, Ireland,Wales, Canada and the United States along with Germany and theNetherlands) and Southeast Asian countries to discuss emerginglegal issues, government and alternative funding sources, access,technology and other urgent concerns facing providers of legalservices to poor clients around the world.Addressing the Pan Pacific Legal Aid Conferenceparticipants, Randi Youells observed that now, largely as a resultof strategic planning, "LSC has more efficient programs, newpartnerships with unlikely stakeholders, powerful new fundingsources, strong allies among the judiciary and the private bar, andstate and local governments have become more sensitive to the needsof low income clients."In Australia, in remarks titled Why Legal Services Has toChange, Youells said, "over the last several years, the legalservices community in the United States has pursued a fundamentalreview of our delivery system-the most far-reaching and challengingwe have ever undertaken. The objective has been to createcoordinated and integrated equal justice communities, which live upto the values and ideals which legal services programs wereinitially created to protect, but which also make sense in this newand ever-changing environment."LSC's Diversity InitiativeIn conjunction with the National Legal Aid and DefenderAssociation (NLADA), LSC launched a series of conversations ondiversity in 2001. Over the year, eight separate conversations onbroad issues of diversity including disability, age, gender, race,sexual orientation and ethnicity took place. Several were three orfour hour discussions with small groups of staff attorneys,directors, or clients. There was also a two-day national conferenceon diversity in the legal services community, a first for LSC andNLADA. Fifty leaders from around the country participated. Reportson each event will be the foundation for an action agenda for LSCand the legal services community.Suggestions and observations raised by client and staffparticipants at the eight diversity events intensified LSC's focuson diversity. Applicants for LSC funds must now describe effortsunderway to cultivate new leadership in their program and in thestate justice community, including how they ensure that leadershipis diverse. State justice community self-evaluations include aseries of inquiries on the diversity work advanced by a state'splan and related activities. Moreover, LSC has hired a stateplanning staff person whose area of expertise and emphasis isdiversity. She will assist state justice communities with thiscritical initiative.LSC Vice President for Programs Randi Youells repeatedlyemphasized diversity and inclusion in her speeches to the legalservices community. Keynote addresses for the Maryland Legal AidBureau staff retreat and the annual state planning meeting in SouthCarolina provided opportunities to highlight LSC's support formulti-cultural competence in program staff along with expandedoutreach to marginalized client communities.LSC retained a consultant to review staff data submittedannually by grantees, and report on the diversity trends thestatistics show. While executive directors of color or who arewomen in our programs has not diminished in spite of a decreasingnumber of programs (from reconfiguration) the number of womenleaders and leaders of color is small compared with their numbersin our pool of attorneys and other professional staff. The resultsof these data will further inform the action agenda, notedabove.Increased Quality and Services through State and RegionCollaborationsIn several states and regions, collaborations aroundclient issues have resulted in the expansion of services toclients. A benefit of Tennessee's fair housing efforts (notedearlier) is that LSC-funded programs in Mississippi, incollaboration with West Tennessee Legal Services, will receive athree-year HUD grant of $350,000 to develop and administer a fairhousing initiative in Mississippi. Initially, West Tennessee LegalServices, a program that has many years of experience in runningHUD projects, will oversee the grant. Gradually administration willbe transferred to South Mississippi Legal Services, which will hirea Project Coordinator. Together, the three other Mississippi LSCprograms will receive $99,000 to implement the initiative in theirservice areas under the guidance of the ProjectCoordinator.New Jersey continued its comprehensive efforts to ensurethat each legal services program in New Jersey was integrated withthe others such that all providers had a "critical mass" ofattorneys on staff, allowing for specialization. Further, theirefforts allowed all attorneys in all of the providers to understandtheir role as part of a statewide delivery system.Missouri created the Missouri Legal Services Commissionto, among other tasks, ensure that all of the Missouri deliverysystem components work together.Massachusetts' providers have formed the Advocacy CoordinatingGroup (ACG) with the participation of all LSC and non-LSC programs,combining expertise across practice areas to address broader issuessuch as access to employment, quality of education and barriers toservice. The ACG identifies gaps in services around the staterelating to these issue areas along with making recommendationabout how best to address those gaps.In Illinois, LSC and non-LSC legal services programs arecollaborating with Chicago Kent College of Law to establish theIllinois Center for Law and Technology (Tech Center). The TechCenter will offer training, information, and other support to legalservices attorneys, paralegals, pro bono attorneys and clients. TheLawyers Trust Fund of Illinois and the Chicago Bar Foundationfunded the first year of operation. LSC/TIG funds will support thesecond year of operation, allowing the Tech Center to develop andexpand resources to include video streaming training, legalresearch, community legal education materials and other supportiveservices. The Tech Center is governed by a board of directorscomposed of representatives of the collaborative partners, and iscurrently housed at Chicago Kent College of Law.In 2001, California held its largest meeting of legal servicesstaff and stakeholders since 1982. During this year also,California's Access to Justice Commission, Legal Aid Associationand the LSC-funded program directors agreed to focus on delivery oflegal services in rural areas, including the reallocation ofresources.Adoption of Uniform "Core Priorities"In 2001, California followed the lead of other states (NewJersey, North Carolina, Florida, and Washington state) and adopteduniform "core priorities" for all programs to assure consistency ofservice throughout the state. In California, there are 102 legalservices programs funded by the state's Legal Services Trust FundProgram (IOLTA), including 78 field programs and 24 supportprograms serving an eligible population of almost five million poorpeople, speaking 224 languages. Of the field programs, eleven areLSC-funded. California's planning and collaborative efforts in thelast year have been numerous and complex, reflecting the state'smany programs, languages, clients and needs. The Legal AidAssociation of California (LAAC) is a membership organization oflegal services programs staffed by the Public InterestClearinghouse. It is the entity in California responsible for stateplanning, and has already adopted core principles for acomprehensive integrated system for the provision of legal servicesin the following topical areas:Meaningful Access to JusticeClient-centered planningStable and adequate resourcesContinuum of servicesInnovative and responsive delivery systemProgram EvaluationCoordination of regional and state planningSpecial needs communitiesExpansive partnerships to increase resourcesCultivating leaders of tomorrowCollaboration of Legal Services Programs and the CourtsIn many states, legal services programs and the courts areworking closely together to expand access to the judicialsystem.North Carolina and Arkansas held their first Equal JusticeConferences. Members of the judiciary were critical in the designof the curriculum and as panelists.In March, Massachusetts held an extremely well attendedstatewide pro se conference. The state justice community and thecourts are now developing the goals and strategies that resultedfrom that event.Nevada Legal Services has led the development of pro se clinicsin the state. In conjunction with Legal Services of Clark County, anon-LSC program, and the Clark County judicial system, NLS hasestablished a Family Law Self-Help Center, located in the ClarkCounty Courthouse across from the clerk's office. NLS employeesstaff the center, supervised by a county employee, who is a lawyer.In the near future, the center wants its forms on line so thatclients can provide the information and forms will be generatedautomatically. The center also offers educational seminars topotential self-help clients. A similar center has been establishedin Washoe County (Reno). A housing self-help center has beenestablished in Las Vegas. It is staffed by NLS employees as well.More recently, NLS staff has joined with the Nevada Supreme Courtand others to draft a uniform set of pleadings that can be used infamily court throughout Nevada. Currently Nevada has no uniform setof forms, and local variations often pose barriers for pro seclients.The Supreme Court of Washington created a new Task Forceon Civil Equal Justice Funding.To enhance our programs' work in these areas, LSC Vice PresidentRandi Youells spoke before the Conference of ChiefJudges/Conference of State Court Administrators Taskforce on Pro SeLitigation. In her remarks she urged the judges and courtadministrators to (1) initiate efforts with local and state barassociations to overcome resistance to pro se activities andself-represented litigants; (2) study selfrepresented litigants todetermine how many of them would have hired (and could haveafforded) a private attorney at the time that they were deniedservices by a legal services program; and (3) promote acceptance ofthe practice of "unbundling" legal services.