TABLE 1EFFECT OF REPLACING TERMINAL DUES WITH DOMESTIC POSTAGE ON THEFINANCES OF INDUSTRIALIZED AND DEVELOPING COUNTRIES AND THE POSTALSERVICE (Amounts in Thousands)FY 2000 Adjusted to Reflect Terminal Dues System Based onDomestic Postage4Payments from the U.S. to FPAs for the Delivery of US Outboundmail 4/ 8/ 5 FPA Payments to the U.S. for the Delivery of ForeignOrigin Inbound Mail 5/ 9/ 6 U.S. Postal Service Net Terminal Dues(L.4 - L.5) ($153,922) ($18,979) ($172,900)7 Estimated Change in U.S. Postal Service Net Terminal Dues (L.6- L.3) ($109,249) $50,159 ($59,090) FPA = Foreign PostalAdministration 1/ FY 2000 terminal dues essentially reflect thecurrent terminal dues system, except forthe 7.5 % surcharge on payments to DCs that go into a commonpool to be usedby DCs for improvements to quality of service. 2/ WT 13, Col. 4,L.1. 3/ WT 11, Col. 1, L. 1 / 1000. 4/ WT 13, Col.3, L. 1. 5/ WT11, Col. 1, L. 2 / 1000. 6/ WT 13, Col.4, L. 4. 7/ WT 11, Col. 2,L. 1 / 1000. 8/ WT 13, Col. 3, L. 4. 9/ WT 11, Col, 2, L. 2 /1000If the U.S. Postal Service and FPAs were to pay each otherterminal dues applying full First Class mail rates to all LC and AOmail exchanged, the U.S. Postal Service would both pay and receivesubstantially larger sums. It should be noted, however, that theCommission has not analyzed the impact of price elasticity on thevolumes of inbound and outbound mail. Table 1, line 6 shows thatunder a domestic postage-based system, the U.S. Postal Servicewould have paid $172.9 million more in FY 2000 than it collected,an increase of $59.1 million (See line7, column 3). Table 1 furthershows that the total payments to industrialized countries wouldincrease from $ million to $ million, a 118 percent increase (Incolumn 1, compare line 1 to line 4). IC payments to theU.S. Postal Service would increase from $ million to $ million.(In column 1, compare line 2 and line 5). The balance of outboundand inbound accounts would change from -$44.7 million to -$153.9million, implying an increase of $109.2 million in internationalmail expenses (See column 1, lines 3, 6, and 7).and combined would account for percent of the increase in the ICterminal dues net balance. would account for $ million and wouldaccount for $ million. This is due partly to the relatively highdomestic rates for these two countries compared to U.S. domesticrates and partly to the disparity in the mail volumes exchangedbetween the U.S. and these two countries. and are among the threelargest recipients of U.S. outbound mail, the third being . U.S.outbound mail to and exceeds the inbound mail from each of thosecountries by about a -to-one ratio. Thus, the imbalance in thevolume of mail exchanged magnifies the effect of the relativelyhigher rates in these countries. actually sent more mail to theU.S. than it received.Basing terminal dues on domestic postage would have the oppositeeffect on the exchange of mail with developing countries. Table 1shows that the U.S. Postal Service's payments to DCs would increasefrom $ million to $ million (In column 2, compare line 1 to line4), while DC payments to the U.S. Postal Service would increasefrom $ million to $ million (In column 2, compare line 2 to line5). Thus, the expenses associated with the exchange ofinternational mail to and from DCs would decrease by about $50.2million under a domestic postage-based terminal dues system (Seecolumn 2, line 7).Overall, considering both the negative effect on expensesassociated with the exchange of mail to the ICs and the positiveeffect on expenses associated with the exchange of mail to DCs, theimplication of this analysis is that a switch from the terminaldues system in effect in FY 2000 to a domestic postage-based systemwould have a negative effect on the Postal Service of about $59.1million (Column 3, line 7). This amount represents 7.4 percent ofthe revenues raised from international postage rates applicable toLC and AO mail dispatched to foreign postal administrations(excluding Canada). This result is valid to the extent that theassumptions concerning the weight profile of the mail, and theapplicability of First-Class rates to such mail, are valid.In addition it should be noted that the terminal dues changed onJanuary 1, 2001. The terminal dues that the U.S. Postal Servicepaid to ICs and collected from ICs during FY 2000 essentially equalthe terminal dues in effect on January 1, 2001. However, theterminal dues between ICs will increase gradually over a three-yearperiod, implying different results for subsequent periods. Anotherchange beginning on January 1, 2001 is a new 7.5 percent surchargeon payments to DCs by ICs. The monies generated by the surchargeflow into a common pool to be parceled out to DCs by the UPU forquality of service improvements. The Commission chose the actual FY2000 results as a convenient benchmark for measuring the effect ofa domestic postage-based terminal dues system. For this reason, FY2000 actual results were not restated to reflect the effect of thesurcharge. However, the effect is relatively easy to calculate.The 7.5 percent surcharge would have added $ million to the FY2000 terminal dues cost (7.5% x $ million) in Table 1, line 1,column 2 and column 3. This would also increase line 3, columns 2and 3 by $ million. Thus, the U.S. Postal Service's FY 2000 netterminal dues shown at line 3, column 3 would increase by $ millionfrom $ to $ . Since the surcharge would not apply in the "domesticpostage" scenario, none of the figures in lines 5 to 7 wouldchange. Table 1, line 7, column 3 shows the difference between theU.S. Postal Service's actual net terminal dues in FY 2000 (-$113.8million) and if the terminal dues in FY 2000 had been based ondomestic postage (-$172.9 million). The difference is -$59.1million. Since the7.5 percent surcharge on DC payments would have decreased the FY2000 net terminal dues to -$ , this also would reduce the netbalance under a domestic postage-based system from -$59.1 million(-$172.9 minus -$113.8) to -$ million (-$172.9 minus - $ ).Effect on Cost Coverage and Institutional Cost Contribution.Table 2 below displays the revenue, attributable cost, contributionto institutional cost, and cost coverage for (1) actual FY 2000 and(2) FY 2000 adjusted to reflect a domestic postage-based paymentsystem for the exchange of mail among countries. It should be notedthat Table 2 includes the revenues and attributable costs for thevolume of mail exchanged between the U.S. Postal Service and Canadaeven though this study did not consider a change in terminal duesrates with Canada, and Canada is the largest market for U.S.International mail.TABLE 2EFFECT OF REPLACING TERMINAL DUES WITH DOMESTIC POSTAGE ONINTERNATIONAL MAIL'S CONTRIBUTION TO INSTITUTIONAL COST AND COSTCOVERAGE (Amounts in Millions)FY 2000 1/ Incremental Outbound Inbound Cost Total(1) (2) (3) (4)=(1)+(2)+(3)1 Revenue 2 Attributable Cost 3 Contibution to InstitutionalCost 4Cost Coverage$1,486 $291 -$1,777 $1,030 $322 $50 $1,402 $456 ($31) ($50) $375144.3% 90.4% -126.7%FY 2000 Assuming Domestic Postage Replaces Current Terminal Dues2/ Incremental Outbound Inbound Cost Total(5) (6) (7) (8)=(5)+(6)+(7)5 Revenue $1,486 4/ 6 Attributable Cost 3/ $322 $50 7Contibution to Institutional Cost ($50) $316 8Cost Coverage-119.8%1/ Postal rate Commission Report to Congress on FY 2000International Volumes, Costs, and Revenues, June 29, 2001, p.42,Table IV-1, Lines 3, 6, or 9, as applicable.2/ For Columns 5 though 8, the only amounts that change in lines1 & 2, compared to columns 1 through 4, are outboundattributable cost and inbound revenue. Contribution and costcoverage change to reflect those differences.3/ Col. 1, L. 2 + WT 13, Col. 5, L.1 / 1000 + WT 13, Col. 5, L.4/ 1000 4/ Col. 2, L.1 + Col. 3, L. 3/ 1,000,000Table 2, line 3 shows that in FY 2000, outbound mail had acontribution to institutional costs of $456 million. Thecorresponding amount for inbound mail was a negative $31 million.It should be noted that this raises an important policy issue.Inbound mail could be viewed as a subclass of mail. By law,subclasses of domestic mail must produce revenues equal to orexceeding attributable costs.International mail as a whole produced a contribution of $375million. Lines 5 through 8 show the effect of changing the methodof payment for the exchange of LC/AO mail between the U.S. and allother FPAs. Changing the terminal dues system affects the U.S.Postal Service's inbound revenues and its outbound attributablecosts. Thus comparing line 1, column 2 to line 5, column 6, showsthat inbound revenues increased from $291 million to $ million,while comparing line 2, column 1 to line 6, column 5 shows thatattributable costs increased from $1,030 million to $ million. Thenet effect on the U.S. Postal Service's international mail financesis to reduce the contribution to institutional costs from $375million to $316 million, a reduction of $59 million. This amountreflects the net increase in the terminal dues net balance that theU.S. Postal Service would experience under a domestic postage-basedsystem, as expected (See table 1, Column 3, Line 7). It should benoted that had the 7.5 percent surcharge on DC terminal dues beenin effect in FY 2000, the contribution under the current terminaldues system would have been $ million lower and the reduction incontribution from shifting to a domestic postage-based system wouldbe $ million compared to $59 million above.The cost coverage for U.S. outbound mail, without consideringthe 7.5 percent surcharge, would be reduced from 144.3 percent topercent and the cost coverage for inbound mail would increase from90.4 percent to percent. Combining outbound and inbound mail, andincluding incremental costs would result in an overall costcoverage of 119.8 percent compared to the FY 2000 cost coverage of126.7 percent.If the U.S. Postal Service wanted to recover the $59 million inlost contribution, it could increase the rates on outbound LC/AOmail, excluding outbound rates to Canada, by 7.5 percent.Alternatively, if it wanted to maintain the FY 2000 overall costcoverage of 126.7 percent, the U.S. Postal Service could increasethose same rates by at least 13.9 percent. There are, of course,other contribution or cost coverage goals that could beselected.Reliability of the Analysis. There are four critical inputs tothis analysis: (1) the distribution of outbound mail by weightinterval, (2) the distribution of inbound mail by weight interval,(3) U.S. Postal Service domestic postage rates, and (4) FPAdomestic postage rates.The Distribution of Outbound Mail by Weight Interval. Like therates of theU.S. Postal Service, the domestic postage rates of FPAs vary byweight interval. Thus, the analysis requires a distribution ofoutbound mail by weight interval. As part of its annual submissionof data and workpapers to the Commission to support theCommission's Report to Congress on International Mail, the PostalService provided the FY 2000 billing determinant data for outboundmail. This data include volumes by the weight intervals associatedwith the U.S. Postal Service's rates for outbound internationalmail. Because the data are not maintained by individual country,except for Canada and Mexico, it was not possible to develop aweight interval distribution for outbound mail unique to eachdestination FPA. The Commission, therefore, assumed that the weightinterval distribution for all outbound mail sent to all FPAs,excluding Canada, was a reasonable proxy for the weight intervaldistribution for mail sent to each FPA. This distribution isapplied to the actual number of pieces sent to each country in FY2000. Thus, distortion could enter the analysis of U.S. outboundmail if there are differences between the proxy distribution andthe actual distribution. The Commission believes it unlikely thatthis would have a meaningful impact on the calculation of terminaldues based on FPA domestic rates.The Distribution of Inbound Mailby Weight Interval. The analysisalso requires a distribution of piece volumes by weight intervalfor inbound mail. The Commission, by a letter to the PostmasterGeneral, requested this distribution from the Postal Service. ThePostal Service responded that the information does not exist.However the Postal Service did provide as much detail as iscollected a volume distribution by transportation mode and shapefor sixty individual countries.In the absence of data showing the weight distribution ofinbound mail, the Commission employed, as a proxy distribution,data developed by European postal administrations in the course ofpreparing a new terminal dues system. The European system, calledREIMS II, relates terminal dues to domestic postage.This distribution represents the aggregate distribution for theREIMS II countries. The REIMS II countries are all industrialcountries, so the distribution is likely a reasonable approximationfor mail received by the U.S. Postal Service from industrialcountries.Developing a distribution for inbound mail from DCs is moreproblematic. The Commission was not able to obtain any data ondeveloping countries. Generally, LC mail is lighter than AO mail.Further, studies by the Universal Postal Union indicate that theaverage weight for each shape (envelope, flat, packet) of mail sentfrom DCs to ICs is 10 to 30 percent less than the average weight ofmail from ICs to ICs. Hence, it appears likely that the proportionof LC to AO mail is less for inbound mail than for outbound. In theabsence of specific data, however, the Commission assumed that theREIMS II data would be a reasonable proxy for DCs also. Thisassumption seems likely to result in an overstatement of thedomestic postage that would be collected on inbound mail. Themagnitude of the overstatement cannot be estimated withconfidence.As noted, the REIMS II data was separated by shape: letters,flats, and small packets. Because the U.S. Postal Service'savailable inbound LC/AO volume data is reported separately forsurface and air, the Commission applied two separate REIMS IIdistributions. For Air LC/AO mail, the distribution for all shapeswas used because inbound Air LC/AO contains all shapes. For SurfaceLC/AO mail, the distribution for flats and small packets combinedwas used for two reasons. First, the volume of inbound surfaceletters is negligible. Second, the average weight per piece was 6.9ounces in FY 2000. This implies that the surface mailstream iscomposed of flats and small packets. These distribution keys appearto reasonably reflect the distribution of inbound of mail, subjectto the caveats above.The REIMS II data did not identify the volume of cards. Becausethere are inbound cards, the Commission assumed that therelationship between U.S. outbound cards and the total volume ofoutbound Air LC/AO mail applies to inbound mail Air LC/AO. Thereasonableness of the assumption is unknown.The Selection of U.S. PostalService Domestic Rates. Based onfield observations and some discussions with U.S. Postal Servicefield personnel, the Commission determined that no inbound mailwould be likely to meet the eligibility requirements for domesticbulk business rates. Thus any inbound mail piece would pay theFirst-Class rate, or the Priority Mail rate for items weighing morethan 13 ounces. Although inbound books and records might beeligible for the Media Mail rates, the amount of this mail isminimal. For these reasons, the Commission has applied the U.S.Postal Service's domestic rates for First-Class and Priority Mailto the inbound mail distribution described above. Of course, if theU.S. Postal Service made available domestic bulk business rates toFPAs, FPAs might prepare inbound mail so that it would meet theeligibility requirements. The Commission's analysis does not takeinto account this possibility. However, because the discounts forbulk mail are cost based, any lost revenues should be offset bycorresponding reduced costs.The Selection of FPA Domestic Rates. To obtain FPA domesticrates, the Commission used the available FPA web sites. TheCommission identified 21 sites with rates for industrial countriesand eight sites with rates for developing countries. Because U.S.Postal Service First-Class/Priority Rates were applied to inboundmail, the Commission tried to identify the corresponding rates forthe FPAs. Identifying these rates was problematic because manycountries do not have First-Class rates for heavy mail. U.S.outbound LC/AO mail weighs up to 22 pounds. To fill the gap inmissing FPA rates, the Commission calculated an extra ounce ratebetween the two highest weight intervals for which there wererates. (The difference between the rates divided by the number ofgrams in the weight interval). The proportion of volume covered bythis extrapolation procedure ranges from 0.1 percent to sevenpercent. Although this approach seems reasonable, there is apotential for substantial overstatement or understatement becausethe amount of estimated domestic postage-based terminal duescalculated under this procedure represents 4 percent of total ICpayments to FPAs and 14 percent of total DC payments. The potentialdistortion is unquantifiable at this time.The Commission also assumed that the average revenue per piecefor the 21 industrial countries whose rates were available appliedto the remaining 5 ICs whose rates were not available. Similarly,the Commission assumed that the average revenue per piece for the 8developing countries with available rates applied to the remaining203 DCs without available rates. The latter assumption is probablyweak, but there is currently no way to improve upon it.Potential Improvements to the Study. In this study, theCommission has sought to provide its best estimates within the timeprovided. The analysis so far suggests the following possibilitiesfor further study:Industrialized countries. First, it would be to desirable todevelop a separate estimate of the international mail revenuesassociated with outbound IC mail. This would allow an estimate ofthe effect on international postage rates of shifting to domesticpostage-based terminal dues in the exchange of mail betweenindustrialized countries. The use of domestic postage-basedterminal dues appears most feasible among industrializedcountries.Second, it would be informative to divide the IC mail exchangeinto LC and AO components. LC mail is the most profitable mail andthe mail to which First-Class domestic postage rates are mostlikely to be applicable in the future. It seems likely that U.S.and foreign mailers would prepare AO mail so that it would qualifyfor lower domestic rates applicable to printed matter and/or lowerpriority delivery. Hence, a separate estimate of the financialeffects of shifting from terminal dues to domestic postage ratesfor LC mail is likely to identify the most significant, persistent,and predicable effects of a shift to domestic postagebased terminaldues. To divide IC mail into LC and AO components, we need furtherdata from the Postal Service or to make additional assumptions.Third, our estimate of the revenue from inbound IC mail could beimproved by a specific study of the weight distribution of inboundmail received from IC FPAs, by class of mail. Our use of REIMS IIdata as a proxy for this distribution appears plausible, but nomore.Fourth, we need to obtain the domestic postage rates for NewZealand and Israel, the only significant outbound IC mail flowsomitted from this analysis.Developing countries. The first improvement needed in regard toDC mail is a specific study providing the weight distribution ofinbound mail received from DC FPAs, by class of mail. This wouldallow a plausible estimate of the revenue the Postal Service wouldreceive by applying domestic postage rates to such mail. Our use ofREIMS II data as a proxy for this distribution was necessary, butnot realistic.Second, further work would likely allow us to develop, for ahigher percentage of outbound DC mail, (1) estimates of thedomestic postage costs that would be incurred if the Postal Servicepaid domestic postage instead of terminal dues and, (2) theoutbound mail revenues associated with such mail flows. In thiseffort, we would anticipate focusing on the most significant postaldestinations among the DCs rather than trying to analyze each andevery destinating DC.The Commission is attaching a disk with the electronicspreadsheets and a hard copy explanation of the procedures used.The U.S. Postal Service considers the terminal dues amountscontained in Table 1 commercially sensitive. The U.S. PostalService also considers the data in the electronic spreadsheetscommercially sensitive because they contain country-specific data.If you have any questions, please contact Bob Cohen (202-789-6850)or Charles Robinson (202-789-6854).With best wishes,Sincerely,George Omas Vice Chairman