REPORT TO THE CONGRESS:AUTHORITY OF THE UNITED STATES POSTAL SERVICE TO INTRODUCE NEWPRODUCTS AND SERVICES AND TO ENTER INTO RATE AND SERVICE AGREEMENTSWITH INDIVIDUAL CUSTOMERS OR GROUPS OF CUSTOMERSUNITED STATES OF AMERICA POSTAL RATE COMMISSIONFebruary 11, 2002POSTAL RATE COMMISSION MemorandumFebruary 11, 2002TO: Senate Committee on Appropriations House Committee onAppropriations Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs HouseCommittee on Government ReformSUBJECT: Report to the Congress on Authority of the UnitedStates Postal Service to Introduce Innovative Products and Servicesand to Enter into Rate and Service AgreementsIn accordance with the direction of the Joint Committee ofConference concerning the 2002 appropriation for the PostalService, the Postal Rate Commission hereby transmits its report onthe scope of existing authority of the United States Postal Serviceunder current postal laws and regulations to introduce new productsand services and to enter into negotiated service agreements withindividual customers or groups of customers.RESPECTFULLY SUBMITTED,George A. Omas, ChairmanRuth Y. Goldway, Vice ChairmanDana B. Covington, Sr., CommissionerREPORT TO THE CONGRESS:APPENDIXPostal Service Product Innovations and Special-Purpose MailClassification Changes Reviewed by the Postal Rate Commission SinceJanuary 1, 2000I. SUMMARYThis report provides an analysis of the United States PostalService's current legal authority to: (1) introduce and provide newproducts and services; and (2) enter into negotiated serviceagreements with individual customers. This report also includesbackground on the use of such authority within the past twoyears.The Commission's analysis of existing postal law yields thefollowing conclusions:The Postal Reorganization Act of 1970 gives the UnitedStates Postal Service a clear mandate to innovate by developingeffective and efficient services adapted to the needs of theNation's mail users.The mechanism for implementing innovations in domesticmail services is the joint authority shared by the Postal Serviceand the Postal Rate Commission to adopt new mail classificationsunder 39 U.S.C.  3623 through 3625.The Postal Rate Commission has developed specializedprocedural rules that provide for expeditious consideration ofproposed service innovations in a manner consistent with the dueprocess rights of other interested persons.Negotiated Service Agreements (NSAs) or "nicheclassifications" are rate and service adjustments arranged by thePostal Service and potential users that are legally permissible,provided that: The proposal is reviewed in a public proceeding, as theReorganization Act requires; The agreed-upon rate and service changes will work to themutual benefit of mail users and the postal system as a whole;and The negotiated rate-and-service package is made available onthe same terms to other potential users willing to meet the sameconditions of service.II. BACKGROUND AND SCOPE OF ANALYSISIn joint deliberations on appropriations for the United StatesPostal Service and certain other agencies and departments forFiscal Year 2002, the committee of conference directed both thePostal Service and the Postal Rate Commission to prepare reports onparticular areas of the Postal Service's authority under existinglaw.1 Specifically, the conferees directed:both the United States Postal Service and the Postal RateCommission to independently report, 90 days after enactment of thisAct, on the scope of existing authority of the US Postal Service,under title 39, United States Code, and title 39, Code of FederalRegulations, to introduce and provide new products and services(including the introduction and provision of new products andservice on an experimental or market test basis) and to enter intonegotiated service agreements with individual customers or groupsof customers. Such reports shall include background on the use ofsuch authority within the past 24 months and shall be provided tothe Committees on Appropriations, the Senate Committee onGovernmental Affairs, and the House Committee on GovernmentReform.H. R. CONF. REP. NO. 107-253, 107th Cong., 1st Sess. 59 (2001).As directed, the Commission submits this report to the Senate andHouse of Representatives Committees on Appropriations, the SenateCommittee on Governmental Affairs, and the House Committee onGovernment Reform.The report is presented in three sections. The first outlinesthe Postal Service's current legal authority to introduce newproducts and services, the role of the Postal Rate Commission inthat process, and the procedural mechanisms available for expeditedapproval of such innovations. The second section addresses the sametopics in connection with Negotiated Service Agreements (NSAs),so-called "niche classifications," which are special service andrate arrangements negotiated between the Postal Service and aparticular mailer or groups of mailers with features tailored totheir use of the postal system. Finally, an appendix to the reportsummarizes recent1 The amended bill produced by the conference committee wasenacted as Pub. L. No. 107-67, 115 Stat. 514 (2001).Commission proceedings in which the Postal Service has sought tointroduce service innovations-some of them customized forparticular groups of mailers-on an expedited basis.III. POSTAL SERVICE AUTHORITY TO DEVELOP, INTRODUCE AND PROVIDENEW PRODUCTS AND SERVICESA. Innovation under the Postal Reorganization ActWhile pre-existing law afforded limited opportunities for postalinnovation,2 the Postal Reorganization Act of 1970 gave thenewly-created United States Postal Service a clear mandate toinnovate by developing effective and efficient services adapted tothe needs of the Nation's mail users. Section 101(a) of Title 39establishes the Postal Service's paramount obligation "to providepostal services to bind the Nation together through the personal,educational, literary, and business correspondence of the people."The same section establishes the performance criterion that thePostal Service is expected to achieve as a matter of postal policy:"It shall provide prompt, reliable, and efficient services topatrons in all areas and . . . all communities." Similarly, 403(a) assigns the Postal Service the duty to "plan, develop,promote, and provide adequate and efficient postal services at fairand reasonable rates and fees." The Act fosters service innovationby assigning the Postal Service responsibility "to provide types ofmail service to meet the needs of different categories of mail andmail users[.]" 39U.S.C.  403(b)(2).The Reorganization Act grants the Postal Service specific powersthat serve as the operational tools of service innovation. Section404 of Title 39 grants the Postal Service plenary authority overcustody of the mail and its movement [ 404(a)(1)]; over thedeployment of post offices, other facilities, and equipment [404(a)(3)]; and over the means by which stamps and other postageare sold [ 404(a)(4) and (5)]. The same section also authorizesthe Postal Service "to provide, establish, change, or abolishspecial nonpostal or similar services[.]" 39 U.S.C. 404(a)(6).Conclusion: The Postal Reorganization Act of 1970 clearlymandates that the Postal Service innovate by developing effectiveand efficient postal services adapted to the needs of the Nation'smail users.2 Former 39 U.S.C.  504(a) authorized the Postmaster General tomaintain a research and development program, and to conductexperiments to enhance the operational efficiency and economy ofthe postal system.B. Commission Review of Proposed Changes in Domestic MailClassificationsPrior to 1970, the array of mail services provided by the PostOffice Department was codified as part of Title 39.3 TheReorganization Act replaced this statutory codification of postalservices with an administrative process in which the Governors ofthe Postal Service establish, and the Postal Rate Commissionreviews proposed changes in, the terms and conditions of postalservices, which are compiled as the Domestic Mail ClassificationSchedule (or "DMCS").4Section 3621 of Title 39 provides that "the Governors areauthorized to establish reasonable and equitable classes of mail .. . in accordance with the provisions of this chapter." Section3623(a) directs the Postal Service to file a request with thePostal Rate Commission for a recommended decision on establishing amail classification schedule within two years of the ReorganizationAct's effective date. The Postal Service complied with thisrequirement early in 1973, and a Domestic Mail ClassificationSchedule recommended by the Commission became effective on July 6,1976.5Following establishment of this initial mail classificationschedule,  3623(b) provides that the Postal Service "may from timeto time request that the Commission submit, or the Commission maysubmit to the Governors on its own initiative, a recommendeddecision on changes in the mail classification schedule."Deliberations on proposed mail classification changes followproceedings in which an opportunity for on the record hearings isafforded to mail users and an officer of the Commission required torepresent the interests of the general public. 39 U.S.C.  3624(a).The Commission's procedural rules governing proposed changes in themail classification schedule are contained in Subpart C of title 39of the Code of Federal Regulations, 39C.F.R.  3001.61 et seq.3 See former Title 39, Part IV-Mail Matter.4 The text of the Domestic Mail Classification Schedule ispublished as Appendix A to Subpart C of 39 C.F.R. Part 3001,following 39 C.F.R.  3001.685 Docket No. MC73-1, Phase I, Opinion and Recommended Decision,April 15, 1976; accepted in Decision of the Governors of the UnitedStates Postal Service on Establishing a Mail ClassificationSchedule, June 2, 1976.Over the past 25 years, the Postal Service has filed many suchmail classification requests with the Commission, seeking either toestablish new postal products or to reconfigure pre-existingservices. Less frequently, the Commission has begun proceedings onits own initiative, most commonly in response to a mail user'srequest to do so. Both forms of proceeding have proven to offeruseful opportunities to introduce innovations in postalservices.Conclusion: The joint authority shared by the Postal Service andthe Postal Rate Commission under the Reorganization Act to adoptnew mail classifications is the mechanism for implementinginnovations in domestic mail service.C. Commission Procedures Adapted to the ExpeditiousConsideration of Proposed Service InnovationsRecognizing that certain types of proposed service innovationsmerit consideration under specialized procedures, the Commissionhas adopted several sets of rules that are customized for definedcategories of Postal Service requests. The rules depart from thosegenerally applicable to proposed mail classification changes byreducing the amount of supporting evidence the Postal Service isrequired to produce, and by expediting the Commission's proceduralschedule for considering the particular form of proposedchange.The Commission determined almost twenty years ago that there wasa need for specialized rules to facilitate Postal Service mailclassification requests involving proposed new services, or changesin existing services, that were intended to serve as experiments.The rules, contained in 39 C.F.R.  3001.67 through .67d, providea mechanism for limiting the issues on which a trial-type hearingis required; allow the Postal Service to explain the unavailabilityof data that would otherwise have to be filed; and provide for datacollection for the duration of the experiment. The experimentalrules also incorporate a procedural time limit of 150 days from theCommission's determination that the proposed change is experimentalin nature.These rules were not used extensively. A joint PostalService-Postal Rate Commission task force suggested a number ofareas where additional special rules might further encourage PostalService innovation.6 The Postal Service petitioned the Commissionin 1995 to adopt rules to implement some of the task force'srecommendations. The Commission conducted a rulemaking to considerthe rules proposed in the Service's petition, and after consideringthe comments of interested parties, implemented four of theproposed initiatives, albeit in revised form.Three of the new sets of rules prescribe expedited proceduresfor particular categories of Postal Service requests. The fourthset specifies conditions under which the Service may use multi-yeartest periods to demonstrate that a proposed new service will becomecompensatory over time.The first set of these new procedural rules, incorporated intothe Commission's rules of practice as sections 161 through 166,7establish expedited procedures for consideration of Postal Serviceproposed market tests of potential new services. The rules specifythe limited information the Service is required to file in supportof a proposed market test, including a plan for testing theproposed new service and associated data collection and reportingrequirements. They also streamline public notice and hearingprocedures, and provide for issuance of a "yes or no" Commissiondecision on the proposed market test within 90 days, consistentwith the procedural due process rights of interested persons. ThePostal Service's innovative Mailing Online service, for which athree-year experimental trial was requested and approved in DocketNo. MC2000-2, was initially considered and recommended by theCommission under the market test rules. See the Appendix to thisreport under the heading for Docket No. MC2000-2.The second set of rules,8 apply to Postal Service proposals toimplement new services that would supplement, but not alter,existing mail classifications and rates on a provisional basis fora limited time. As in the market test rules, the provisionalservice rules identify the supporting information to be provided bythe Postal Service; in addition, they allow the Service to explainwhy it should not be required to provide6 See Postal Ratemaking in a Time of Change: A Report by theJoint Task Force on Postal Ratemaking, June 1, 1992.7 39 C.F.R.  3001.161-.166.8 39 C.F.R.  3001.171-.176.information called for in the Commission's general rules formail classification proposals. The rules likewise expedite publicnotice and procedural scheduling, providing for a "yes or no"Commission decision within 90 days, consistent with the due processrights of other parties.A third set of rules, adopted as sections 69 through 69c of therules of practice,9 applies to Postal Service requests forpermanent mail classification changes that are minor in character."Minor" classification changes are defined as those that would notchange any existing rate or fee; would not impose any newrestriction on eligibility for mailing; and would not significantlyincrease or decrease the estimated contribution of the affectedmail subclass or service category to the institutional costs of thePostal Service. The rules specify limited required supportinginformation, allow the Service to explain the unavailability ofotherwise required data, and also streamline procedural scheduling.Under these rules for minor classification proposals, theprocedural deadline for rendering a Commission decision is 90 daysfrom the filing of the Postal Service request if no hearings areheld, and 120 days if hearings are scheduled in the case.Finally, the fourth set of rules, contained in sections 181 and182 of the rules of practice, 10 applies to Postal Service requestsfor new services that it believes cannot recover all theirassociated costs in the first full fiscal year of their operation.In such instances, the Service's request must be supported bytestimony of a Postal Service witness that explains the rationalefor the proposed multi-year test period. The request should alsoprovide Return on Investment projections, other available financialanalyses, and cost, revenue, and volume estimates for the newservice for the entire proposed test period. The rules establish apolicy standard that allows test periods of up to five fiscal yearsfor the purpose of determining breakeven for newly introducedpostal services.The Commission adopted these four sets of rules in 1996, to beeffective for a period of five years. In light of their apparentworkability in several Commission proceedings and their continuingusefulness for affording procedural flexibility to the9 39 C.F.R.  3001.69-69c. 10 39 C.F.R.  3001.181-.182.Postal Service, the Commission extended their application for anadditional five-year period in a recent rulemaking.11Conclusion: Specialized Postal Rate Commission rules ofprocedure are currently available for use by the Postal Service toprovide expeditious consideration of proposed service innovationsin a manner consistent with the due process rights of allinterested persons.11 Docket No. RM2001-3, Order No. 1322, 66 Fed. Reg. 54436(2001).IV. POSTAL SERVICE AUTHORITY TO ENTER INTO NEGOTIATED RATE ANDSERVICE AGREEMENTS WITH INDIVIDUAL CUSTOMERS OR GROUPS OF CUSTOMERSTO PROVIDE SERVICESFor a number of years, some mailers have pursued the idea ofestablishing customized postal rates and/or terms of servicethrough negotiation with the Postal Service. Depending on theirrespective objectives and features, contractual arrangements ofthis kind have been labeled "contract rates," "negotiated serviceagreements," or more recently, "niche classifications." Inaddressing the consistency of these various approaches with currentlaw, it is important to identify and consider all of theircharacteristics. For example, the legality of an agreement may bedependent on whether the contract is agreed upon and performedwithout any regulatory scrutiny, or instead submitted for some formof review by the Postal Rate Commission prior to itseffectiveness.A. Statutory Bases of Potential AuthorityNo provision in existing law explicitly authorizes or prohibitsthe Postal Service from entering into rate or service agreementswith mail users. Section 401(3) of Title 39 generally empowers theService "to enter into and perform contracts," and there is noprohibition elsewhere against the Postal Service and mail usersnegotiating and reaching consensus as to how rates or conditions ofservice should be changed. However, other provisions in Title 39cast into doubt the conclusion that the Service's authority under 401(3) is sufficiently broad to encompass changes in rates or mailclassifications by agreement alone.The obstacles to this conclusion are both procedural andsubstantive. From a procedural perspective, the legal soundness ofrate or mail classification changes by contract alone is doubtfulbecause the only means of making such changes recognized in theReorganization Act are the procedures prescribed in Chapter 36 ofTitle 39. These provisions require that rate or mail classificationchanges desired by the Postal Service must be filed as a requestwith the Postal Rate Commission, allowing for public scrutiny anddeliberations by the Commission and the Governors of the PostalService.Failure to abide by the procedural requirements of Chapter 36has been recognized as a sufficient legal basis for voiding theintended change.12Negotiated rate or service changes also may run afoul of thesubstantive standards prescribed for rates and mail classificationsin the Reorganization Act. Section 403(c) of Title 39 directsthat:In providing services and in establishing classifications,rates, and fees under this title, the Postal Service shall not,except as specifically authorized in this title, make any undue orunreasonable discrimination among users of the mails, nor shall itgrant any undue or unreasonable preferences to any such user.Sections 3622 and 3623 similarly specify fairness and equity,together with other criteria, as considerations to be observed inmaking rate and mail classification changes. Without publicscrutiny and review of the terms of a given rate or serviceagreement between the Postal Service and a customer, there could beno assurance that these substantive criteria would besatisfied.However, assuming the procedural requirements of Chapter 36 aremet, changes negotiated by the Postal Service and a mail user fortheir mutual benefit may merit recommendation under the applicablestatutory standards. Section 3623(c) directs the Commission toconsider "the desirability and justification for specialclassifications and services of mail" [ 3623(c)(2)] and "thedesirability of special classifications from the point of view ofboth the user and of the Postal Service" [ 3623(c)(5)]. Regardingrates,  3622(b)(6) establishes "the degree of preparation of mailfor delivery into the postal system performed by the mailer and itseffect upon reducing costs to the Postal Service" as a factor to beconsidered in connection with a proposed change. In combinationwith other factors and the policies of the Reorganization Act,these12 United Parcel Service v. U. S. Postal Service, 455 F.Supp.857 (E.D. Pa. 1978), affirmed, 604 F.2d 1370 (3d Cir. 1979), cert.denied, 446 U.S. 957 (1980).considerations could support recommendation of rate andclassification changes tailored to the capabilities and needs ofparticular mailers.Conclusion: Rate and service agreements negotiated by the PostalService and mail users are permissible under current law if theprocedural and substantive requirements of the PostalReorganization Act are satisfied.B. Problematical "Contract Rates"In a rulemaking proceeding conducted in the late 1980s at therequest of a mailer, the Commission addressed the question of thePostal Service's authority to negotiate rate changes in the form ofa proposal to recognize "contract rates." After consideringcomments of the Postal Service and other participants, theCommission found the proposal problematical, and declined to pursueit.The initial proposal, considered in Docket No. RM89-5, includedtwo variants:1.The Commission might, after considering cost and otherrelevant evidence, establish a range of permissible rates forparticular subclasses, with the Postal Service and individualmailers free thereafter to negotiate rates within this range;or2.The Postal Service and one or more mailers wouldnegotiate a rate and service package which would then (i) besubmitted to the Commission for a review, and (ii) thereafter beavailable on the same terms to all potential users.The Commission solicited two rounds of comments on the proposalfrom interested parties. The proponent and one other mailer tookthe position that the Postal Service is authorized to enter intosuch contracts, provided the procedural requirement of review underChapter 36 is observed. Other commenters-including the Commission'sOffice of Consumer Advocate-expressed doubts regarding the legalsoundness of one or both of the proposed variants of suchagreements. The Postal Service commented that, in its view, legalconstraints would not preclude a contract mechanism in principle,but that no such arrangement would be permissible without theCommission's participation in accordance with 39 U.S.C.  3622through 3625.Upon consideration of the initial comments it received, theCommission declined to pursue the contract rate proposal, butsolicited further comments on several broad issues concerningpossible changes in the mail classification system. The Commissionexplained that its reluctance to pursue the concept of contractrates was based on substantial uncertainty regarding the legalsufficiency of examining agreed-upon rates after the fact, ratherthan in a prior review. It also raised the potential problems ofunreasonable discrimination that such contracts might cause, incontravention of 39U.S.C.  403(c), and the preservation of fair contributions tothe Postal Service's institutional costs by mail volumes.13 Suchproblems might well arise if the Service were to negotiate"discounted" rates-unaccompanied by a change in service conditionsthat provided cost or revenue justification.Conclusion: Negotiated rates-unaccompanied by a change inservice conditions that provides cost justification-are aproblematical approach to introducing additional flexibility intoPostal Service business practices.C. Negotiated Service Agreements and Specialized "NicheClassifications"Following publication of the report of the joint PostalService-Postal Rate Commission task force on ratemaking, the PostalService petitioned the Commission to adopt rules to implement someof the report's recommendations. One recommendation included in theService's petition was adoption of Commission rules for reviewingon an expedited basis "service agreements with postal customers,varying from the general rate and classifications schedules in wayswhich add value both for the customer and for the postal system asa whole."14The proposal in the Postal Service's petition would haveestablished Negotiated Service Agreements as a new form of mailclassification, with individual agreements to be reviewed by theCommission within 60 days. In the Commission's Notice of ProposedRulemaking, it deferred consideration of the NSA proposal, citinglegal uncertainty regarding the consistency of negotiated rateswith the Reorganization Act's13 Docket No. RM89-5, Further Invitation for Comments, 54 Fed.Reg. 47223 (1989). 14 Postal Ratemaking in a Time of Change, supra,at 54.ratemaking provisions. However, the Commission also expressed ageneral willingness to address the concept in a subsequentrulemaking.Since then, the Commission has conducted several mailclassification proceedings under the other expedited proceduresadopted in that rulemaking. These procedures have been shown to bewell suited to the consideration of "niche classification"proposals. Niche classifications are specialized mailclassifications- including reduced, but cost-justified rates orfees-that have been developed by the Postal Service in directconsultation with its customers, to meet the needs and capabilitiesof a mailer or group of mailers. For example, the Commissionapproved a two-year experiment of a program that enabled users ofbulk, nonletter-size Business Reply Mail such as photofinishersthat could reliably determine postage and fees due, to obtainearlier access to their mail at revised fees.15 The Commissionsubsequently granted a requested extension of the experiment,16 andultimately approved a request to make the experimental program apermanent mail classification.17 More recently, in Docket No.MC2001-1, the Commission recommended three new worksharing-baseddiscounted Priority Mail categories after negotiating with mailerswho were willing to presort their mail in new ways that couldreduce the Postal Service's costs.18 Such "niche classification"proposals are essentially Negotiated Service Agreements, withoutany associated legal uncertainties or additional administrativebarriers.Conclusion: Rate and service adjustments agreed upon by thePostal Service and mailers are legally authorized if threeconditions are satisfied: The proposal is reviewed in a public proceeding, as theReorganization Act requires; The agreed-upon rate and service changes will work to themutual benefit of mail users and the postal system as a whole;and15 Docket No. MC97-1, Opinion and Recommended Decision, April 2,1997.16 Docket No. MC99-1, Opinion and Recommended Decision ApprovingRevised Stipulation and Agreement, May 14, 1998.17 Docket No. MC99-2, Opinion and Recommended Decision ApprovingStipulation and Agreement, July 14, 1999.18 See the description of this proceeding in the Appendix. The negotiated rate-and-service package is made available onthe same terms to other potential users willing to meet the sameconditions of service.Examples of "niche classification" proposals recommended inrecent Commission proceedings, and Postal Service productinnovations considered in other cases, are described in theAppendix to this report.Report To The Congress Appendix Feb. 11, 2002 Page 1 of 2Postal Service Product Innovations and Special-Purpose MailClassification Changes Reviewed by the Postal Rate Commission SinceJanuary 1, 2000Docket No. MC2001-1-Experimental Presorted Priority Mail RateCategoriesNature of service or change: Experimental trial of threenew presorted rate categories of Priority Mail.Target users: Mailers who can meet minimum quantity, mailpreparation and containerization requirements for presorting theirPriority Mail shipments.Rate(s) and justification: Three levels of presortdiscounts based on processing costs bypassed because of worksharingby mailers.Procedural history: Request filed by Postal Service onMarch 7, 2001. Settlement agreement among parties filed on May 17,2001. PRC decision approving settlement agreement transmitted toPostal Service Governors on May 25, 2001. Governors approved PRCdecision on June 4, 2001.Docket No. MC2000-1-Experimental "Ride-Along" ClassificationChange for PeriodicalsNature of service or change: Experiment allowing onepiece of advertising matter to "ride-along" in a Periodicalspublication for a flat additional ten-cent rate.Target users: Publishers who wish to include innovativeadvertisements in their periodicals at a more affordable rate thanStandard A postage.Rate(s) and justification: Flat ten-cent rate availableonly for "ride-along" pieces that do not cause any significantadditional mail processing or delivery costs.Procedural history: Request filed by Postal Service onSeptember 27, 1999. Settlement agreement among parties filed onDecember 20, 1999. PRC decision approving settlement agreementtransmitted to Postal Service Governors on February 3, 2000.Governors approved PRC decision on February 8, 2000. Update: Postal Service request for permanent authority filedSeptember 24, 2001 in Docket No. R2001-1. Action by Commission ispending. Postal Service Request for extension of experiment filedin Docket No. MC2001-3 on September 28, 2001. PRC decisionapproving request transmitted to Postal Service Governors onJanuary 11, 2002.Report To The Congress Appendix Feb. 11, 2002 Page 2 of 2Docket No. MC2000-2-Mailing Online ExperimentNature of service or change: Experimental serviceenabling computer users to transmit documents in electronic form toPostal Service for printing, processing, and delivery as ExpressMail, First-Class Mail or Standard A Mail.Target users: Single-piece mailers and small office/homeoffice (SOHO) operators who have difficulty taking advantage oftraditional mail service providers.Rate(s) and justification: Applicable bulk mailing rateplus fee to recover costs of printing, technological resources,advertising and other program-related expenses.Procedural history: Market test of same service approvedby PRC in Docket No. MC98-1. Request for three-year experimentfiled by Postal Service on November 16, 1999. Hearings heldDecember, 1999 through February, 2000. PRC decision approvingproposal, with recommended fee modifications, on June 21, 2000.Governors approved PRC decision on August 7, 2000.Docket No. MC2001-2-Experimental Seasonal Delivery ConfirmationFeeNature of service or change: Experiment to provide manualdelivery confirmation without charge to retail Priority Mail usersduring two weeks before the peak of the holiday mailingseason.Target users: Small volume mailers that might be mademore inclined to mail before the holiday peak, and that also might,as a result of the test, increase their purchases of deliveryconfirmation service in the future.Rate(s) and justification: Delivery confirmation to beavailable at no charge to retail Priority Mail users during theearly stages of the holiday season.Procedural History: Request Filed by Postal ServiceSeptember 20, 2001. Postal Service withdrew request on November 5,2001 because the disruption of other events made conducting theexperiment inadvisable.