The LSC Matters Reporting SystemAugust 8, 2002IntroductionStarting on July 1, 2001, all LSC grantees began collectinginformation on non-case activities using the Matters ReportingSystem. LSC had long noted that grantee programs provide referralsand community legal education, that they engage in outreach, andthat they work cooperatively with other groups to address the needsof the low income community. We recognized that this work oftenentails a great deal of effort and produces significant results.With the Matters Reporting System in place, an important tool hasbeen created for use by legal services leaders at the national,state and local levels in describing the full scale and scope oflegal services being delivered in communities across thenation.Although the 2001 data reported in March of this year should beregarded as preliminary (it covered only half a year and reflectedthe usual kinds of startup problems one would expect of a new datasystem), it already has produced a wealth of information thatallows the Corporation to provide a more complete picture of legalservices practice than has ever before been possible on anationwide basis. For example, we can already say that:! The total number of people being served annually by LSCgrantees is several times the number of cases being reported on theCase Service Report (CSR). A conservative estimate of just thepeople receiving services that can be easily counted, such asreferrals and legal education presentations, shows that more thantwo million people were provided with these services in the lastsix months of 2001 alone. Many more were provided with otherservices using delivery vehicles whose reach is more difficult toquantify, such as web sites, weekly radio and TV shows and legalinformation columns in newspapers.! More than 75 percent of grantees are providing various formsof pro se assistance. These include workshops, courthouse helpdesks, forms, pleadings, self-help packets and other resources forself-representation in simple legal matters. In addition toproviding an important service to people who cannot afford lawyers,LSC grantees are playing a significant role in helping courts todeal with the flood of self-represented litigants appearing incourtrooms across the nation.! Increasingly, LSC grantees are important gatekeepers, or"hubs," in referral networks of agencies and service providersserving low income people. These are addressing a wide range ofneeds of the poor, including access to jobs, education, shelter andpersonal safety. Many LSC grantees operate intake systems thatsystematically diagnose each applicant's problems and makereferrals through a network of legal and non-legal serviceproviders in the community who can provide the most appropriatetypes and levels of service.With the implementation of the Matters Reporting System, theCorporation has created an asset offering significant dividends forstakeholders at all levels of the civil justice system. Along withthe CSR system, which quantifies "case" services, the MattersReporting System provides an expanded capacity to produce numericaland narrative data describing the full range of services providedby the core network of legal services programs serving communitiesacross the nation. With further refinements underway to improvereliability, this system will enable program leaders at all levelsto provide Congress, client groups, state legislatures, barleaders, courts, funders and other stakeholders with a moreaccurate picture of how many people are being served by LSC-fundedprograms. It will help to identify innovative, best-practice modelsthat point the way toward more efficient and effective methods ofaddressing the legal needs of low income people. It will inform LSCgrantees about the range of methods being used by their fellowprogram managers to deliver more and better services and to assistpeople with the precise level and type of service appropriate totheir legal situation. It will enable leaders to do a better job ofmarketing legal services by telling the "story" of what LSCgrantees are contributing to their communities through thepartnerships they have created and the wide range of solutions theyhave put in place.In the next section of this report, we describe in more detailthe picture that emerges from the 2001 Matters Service Reports. Inaddition, we outline some changes that the LSC "Results Group" (aworking group of senior LSC professionals plus Ken Smith, anoutside consultant, that designed, tested, and is currentlyevaluating and refining a system for reporting matters services) isconsidering for improving the reliability of the data obtained for2002 and 2003.Overview of Matters Services Provided by LSC GranteesA. More than two million people received significant Mattersservices from LSC grantees in the last half of 2001.This figure is conservative. It only includes the counts thatthe LSC Results Group deemed reliable based on a review of the dataand follow-up interviews with a sample of grantees. (See Exhibit 1for a summary of "reliable" versus "soft" numbers.) The actualnumber of people provided various non-case services by LSC-fundedprograms is almost certainly several times higher. Refinements inthe guidelines provided to grantees, planned for distribution inOctober 2002, will provide more reliable figures to be generatedcovering 2002 and 2003 services.B. "Matters" services were of six types.1. Community legal education. 195 LSC grantees (99.5 percent)reported providing community legal education services to low incomepeople in their communities. According to "matters" reports bygrantees, in the second half of 2001, more than 1,450,000 peoplereceived these services. Among the services delivered were thefollowing:! Presentations at gatherings of low income people (for example,residents of a local senior center);! Legal education brochures distributed at community centers,helping agencies and other community sites;! Legal education videos distributed through libraries,courthouse kiosks, public access TV and community sites;! Legal education materials downloaded over the Internet bypeople visiting web sites maintained by LSC grantees.Community legal education is a crucial service provided by LSCgrantees. It informs low income people about their legal rights andresponsibilities connected with various situations they mightencounter as consumers, tenants, parents, spouses, employees andcitizens. It equips people to handle simple matters themselves,reducing the strain on already-overburdened courts and legalassistance programs. It is preventative, helping people to avoidmistakes that can lead to more serious legal problems and the needfor representation in the future.2. Pro se assistance. Legal services programs provide a broadrange of generalized information and assistance to people wishingto handle simple legal matters themselves without extensiveassistance from an attorney. 150 LSC grantees reported that in 2001they provided pro se assistance services. They indicated that inthe second half of 2001 more than 183,000 people were served. Thenumbers of grantees providing different types of services were asfollows:Number of Grantees! Self-help workshopsor clinics 89 ! Help desk at court 56 ! Self help materialsposted on web sites 44 ! Other (e.g., self helpmaterials posted on kiosks) 703. Referrals. People come to legal aid offices with a wide rangeof problems, some of them falling within the scope of the program'spriorities and others that do not. Referring people to otherorganizations that can help them is a crucial service that mostlegal aid programs provide.Any referral which is not a "case" as defined by the CSR systemcan be counted as a matter. Examples of "matters" referrals wouldbe criminal matters or civil problems excluded under a grantee'spriorities - for example, divorces not involving domestic violenceor children.In the second half of 2001, grantees reported providing"matters" referrals to 533,490 people. The table below indicatesthe kinds of help to which these people were referred:4. Outreach. LSC grantees seek to increase visibility in theclient community in several situations - for example, whenlaunching new services (for example, a toll-free phone hotline),trying to reach special-needs populations (the elderly, homelesspeople, families reaching the end of their eligibility period forwelfare, people in non-English speaking communities) or expandingservices into hard-to-serve communities (for example, to smalltowns far from legal aid offices).89 percent of LSC grantees reported that they conducted outreachefforts in 2001. The method used most often (by 61 percent ofgrantees) was referral agreements with other agencies. These areagreements made with other service providers, such as domesticviolence shelters, to refer eligible clients to our grantees. Thisis a very effective way of letting the public know we arethere.Other outreach methods used were informational notices printedin local media (53 percent), TV spots or public serviceannouncements (32 percent), radio spots or announcements (39percent), newsletters of other organizations (44 percent), "how toreach us" information on web sites (59 percent) and other methods(49 percent).Increasingly, grantees are using targeted outreach methodsrather than shotgun approaches like general media advertising.These are designed to reach people specifically having criticallegal needs addressed by special legal aid projects such asdomestic violence clinics, eviction prevention programs anddisability advocacy units. An example of targeted outreach is theposting of an advertisement for order-of-protection clinics indomestic violence shelters and family counseling agencies.5. Indirect services.Number of Grantees169Some legal aid programs tap the significant resources of othercommunity organizations in an effort to expand their reach. Theyare doing this by providing legal training and support tonon-lawyer "helping" personnel such as social workers, ministers,teachers and shelter staff who apply this new knowledge to helptheir clients find appropriate legal information and advice whenthey have a legal problem. One hundred sixty nine grantees reportedthey used such "indirect" service delivery models in 2001.This has a multiplier effect: one lawyer trains 20 socialworkers, each of whom helps 50 clients, resulting in 1,000 peopleand families getting legal information, materials or referrals theymight otherwise not have had.Applying this principle, legal aid programs are beginning toform collaborations with other agencies to provide holisticsolutions for complex problems such as domestic violence that raiseother issues such as the need for income support, health care andchild care services. Legal aid lawyers and paralegals increasinglyare partnering with social workers, medical people, job counselorsand other specialists to provide the right mix of legal andnon-legal services people need to get back on their feet.6. Other services. In addition to the above, there are a numberof newer kinds of services that grantees reported as "matters" in2001. These include the following:Number of Grantees! Mediation / alternativedispute resolution 38 ! Other 58In the last six months of 2001 LSC programs reported providingsuch "other " Matters services to over 49,000 peopleC. Significance: "Matters" services have major impacts on ourcommunities, courts and low income population.! Community legal education prevents small problems from gettingworse and reduces the strain on our legal system.! Pro se assistance empowers people to help themselves and makesour court system work better.! Referrals help people find the help they need.It is clear from the Matters Service Reports that LSC granteeshave dramatically expanded the range of strategies available foraddressing the legal needs of low income people. The datacollection system provides LSC with the capacity to track theexpansion of these methods and to better describe their scale andimpacts as this expansion continues.The Matters data includes some people who were not eligibleclients. It is impractical to restrict grantees to counting onlymatters handled on behalf of client-eligible people. However, webelieve that the number is a small proportion of the total. LSCgrantees go to considerable lengths to focus services on theclient-eligible population. In the first instance, this is done bypresenting the services as being for the poor, including thetargeting of outreach efforts on groups and areas in which poorpeople congregate and live. The subject matter of written materialsand of events (for example, legal education workshops is on issuesof particular concern to our clients). The sponsorship and locationof events and location of grantee offices contributes to thistargeting. And where ineligible persons participate anyway, thegreat majority of them are near-poor, often those who are eligibleunder non-LSC funding programs such as IOLTA and Administration onAging.Even with web-based services, which are notoriously difficult totarget exclusively to a particular segment, there is some evidencethat the majority of users are client-eligible people. For example,web visitor survey data from Pinetree Legal Services in Maineindicates that two-thirds of its site visitors are low incomepeople or persons seeking information on behalf of low incomepeople.Implementation of the System: A Status ReportPlanning for the matters service reports process was severalmonths in the making. In designing the instrument, consultant KenSmith and the LSC Results Group examined existing data collectionmodels that state IOLTA funders and individual programs had used.The group then drafted an instrument and pilot tested it with avolunteer group of 22 programs in January 2001. Their experienceled to the version that was implemented in all LSC grantee programsin July, 2001.What's working, what issues need to be addressed.The general concept of matters is working well. The data systemseems to have been well accepted by field programs; The systemincludes a narrative component as well as statistical reporting,providing the Corporation with a strong capacity for describing thecharacter as well as the volume of services and delivery models inuse.The 2001 reports have enabled the LSC Results Group to identifyadjustments for improving reliability of the numerical data beingprovided by grantees. These include! Clarification of definitions. For example, "web hits" werecounted in the 2001 version of the system, but this proved to be avague concept that produced huge numbers but little useableinformation. Definitions will be clarified for measures to be usedin 2003 for quantifying the reach of web-based legal education andpro se assistance models.! Additional questions. Considering the difficulty of changingdata collection systems in mid-stream, few changes are beingconsidered that would require grantees to revise their forms orprocedures. However, in a few areas, small changes will be proposedthat are relatively easy to implement. For example, in 2002grantees will be asked to report the number of newspaper articlespublished rather than the number of people reached by newspaperarticles, which is nearly impossible to quantify in a usefulway.! Improved guidelines. For example, more guidance will beprovided to grantees on quantifying the numbers of brochures andmaterials packets they have distributed. Clearer distinctions willbe drawn between newsletter articles, which are targeted towell-defined audiences, and newspaper articles, which are broadcastto the general population. Additional guidelines will be providedfor estimating numbers that cannot be directly counted.These changes are expected to lead to greater reliability in thematters data for 2002 and 2003. Some of the figures which granteesestimated in 2001 will be measured in 2002 as data collectionsystems become better established and guidelines get widerdistribution to program staff. Figures which the Results Groupdeemed too "soft" to be used in 2001 will eventually be moved tothe "reliable" column.ConclusionThe data from the Matters Reporting System can be used for avariety of important purposes. These include:! Producing materials that provide Congress, bar leaders andother stakeholders with a more accurate picture of how many peopleare being served by LSC-funded programs.! Describing the benefits that services such as community legaleducation, pro se assistance and referrals to community agenciesprovide to the communities served by LSC grantees.! Identifying programs that have developed innovative,best-practice models, pointing the way toward more efficient andeffective methods of addressing the legal needs of low incomepeople.! Informing grantees about the range of methods being used bytheir fellow program managers to deliver more and better servicesand to reach more people with the precise level and type of serviceappropriate to their legal situation.! Doing a better job of marketing legal services by telling the"story" of what LSC grantees are contributing to their communitiesthrough the partnerships they have created and the wide range ofsolutions they have put in place.The Matters Reporting System represents an important asset nowin place in LSC-funded programs. It will provide a stream ofinformation about legal services practice serving the civil justicecommunity well into the future.