EXECUTIVE SUMMARY - THE CLEAR SKIES INITIATIVEFebruary 14, 2002Today, President Bush proposed the most significant step Americahas ever taken to cut power plant emissions, the Clear SkiesInitiative. This new proposal will aggressively reduce airpollution from electricity generators and improve air qualitythroughout the country. The Clear Skies Initiative will cut airpollution 70 percent, using a proven, market-based approach thatwill save American consumers millions of dollars.America needs a clean, secure, affordable, reliable energysupply in the years ahead. President Bush has often said thatenvironmental protection and energy production are not competingpriorities. This progressive plan shows how that objective can bereached. We can meet our environmental goals while providingaffordable electricity for American consumers and Americanbusinesses.America has made great progress in reducing air pollution. Overthe last three decades, air pollution has declined by 29 percent,while our economy has grown nearly 160 percent. These gains haveprovided cleaner air for millions of people. Our understanding ofscience, technology, and markets has improved since the Clean AirAct was passed in 1970. We know more about the best way to reducepollution, and how to do it cost effectively. The acid rain cap andtrade program created by Congress in 1990 reduced more pollution inthe last decade than all other Clean Air Act command-and-controlprograms combined, and achieved significant reductions attwo-thirds of the cost to accomplish those reductions using a"command-and-control" system. It's time to take the best of what wehave learned and modernize the Clean Air Act. That's why PresidentBush is proposing a new Clean Air Act for the 21st century.The Clear Skies Initiative will:Dramatically Cut Power Plants' Emissions of Three of the WorstAir Pollutants. Cut sulfur dioxide (SO2) emissions by 73 percent, from currentemissions of 11 million tons to a cap of 4.5 million tons in 2010,and 3 million tons in 2018. Cut emissions of nitrogen oxides (NOx) by 67 percent, fromcurrent emissions of 5 million tons to a cap of 2.1 million tons in2008, and to 1.7 million tons in 2018. Cutting mercury emissions by 69 percent, -the first-evernational cap on mercury emissions. Emissions will be cut fromcurrent emissions of 48 tons to a cap of 26 tons in 2010, and 15tons in 2018. Emission caps will be set to account for different air qualityneeds in the East and the West.Use A New, Market-Based Approach To Clean Air: Protect Americans from respiratory and cardiovascular diseasesby dramatically reducing smog, fine particulate matter, regionalhaze; and protect wildlife habitat and ecosystem health from acidrain, nitrogen and mercury deposition. NOx and SO2 emissions bothcontribute to fine particulate matter emissions and NOx alsocontributes to ground-level ozone or smog. Save Americans as much as $1 billion annually in compliancecosts that are passed along to American consumers, while improvingair quality and protecting the reliability and affordability ofelectricity for consumers. Cut pollution further, faster, cheaper - and with morecertainty - eliminating the need for expensive and uncertainlitigation as a means of achieving clean air. Build upon the 1990 Clean Air Act's acid rain program,America's most successful clean air law in the last decade, andencourage the use of new pollution control technologies.President Bush has a strong track record on enactingfar-reaching clean air initiatives. In 1999, then-Governor Bushsigned legislation that permanently caps NOx and SO2 emissions fromolder power plants in Texas starting in 2003. The legislation waswidely hailed as a model for the country. The Texas program isdesigned to reduce NOx emissions by 75,000 tons per year, and SO2emissions by 35,000 tons per year, while giving utilitiesflexibility in determining how and where to achieve thereductions.This approach enjoys strong, bipartisan support throughout thecountry:"Congress should pass legislation to establish a flexible,market-based program to significantly reduce and cap emissions ofsulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, mercury and voluntary reductionsof carbon dioxide from electric power generators. The legislationshould provide regulatory certainty by establishing reductiontargets for emissions, phasing in reductions over a reasonableperiod of time and providing market-based incentives such asemissions-trading credits to help achieve the requiredreductions."Unanimous Resolution of the National Governors Association,August, 2001.The Environmental Council of the States approved a resolution inFebruary, 2001, supporting a cost-effective, efficient andenvironmentally protective multi-pollutant proposal.BACKGROUND  THE SUCCESS OF THE CLEAN AIR ACTPOLLUTION HAS DECLINED BY 29 PERCENT WHILE OUR ECONOMY HAS GROWNNEARLY 160 PERCENTIn the U.S., power plants emit significant amounts of airpollution: 67 percent of all sulfur dioxide (SO2) emissions, 37percent of mercury emissions, and 25 percent of all nitrogen oxide(NOx) emissions. These pollutants contribute to a variety of healthand environmental problems, such as smog, acid rain, nitrogendeposition and visibility impairment.Current law addresses each of these pollutants independently, ondifferent timetables, through several different programs. Theselaws are uncoordinated and often inconsistent. Power plants mightinstall equipment one year that is rendered obsolete the next.Implementation and enforcement usually requires years oflitigation, leaving the fate of America's air to the uncertaintiesof the courtroom.After 30 years of experience in regulating air pollution,America has proved that there is a better way to accomplish ourclean air goals.The 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments, proposed and signed into lawby President George H.W. Bush, have significantly reduced airpollution, especially through the innovative "cap-and trade" acidrain control program. The acid rain program has been a resoundingsuccess, cutting annual sulfur dioxide emissions in the first phaseby 50 percent below allowed levels. Emissions were reduced fasterthan required, and at far less cost. Industry compliance has beennearly 100 percent, and the program only requires a handful of EPAemployees to operate. This approach is vastly more effective, andcheaper - two-thirds cheaper - than the traditional"command-and-control" approach.This program is clearly a model for success. President Bushwants to expand this program to include two new pollutants -nitrogen oxides and mercury - while also dramatically reducing theSO2 emissions allowed by current law.THE CLEAR SKIES INITIATIVE  BUILDING ON THE CLEAN AIR ACTThe President's Clear Skies Initiative is designed to help usmeet our national air quality goals. A new Clean Air Act for the21st century must build on this founding principle -modernizationand better technology will mean a progressive new way to accomplishthese long-standing environmental goals. The Clear Skies Initiativewill continue to bring Americans: Improved Air Quality: Reducing air pollution will bring cleanair to tens of millions of people, saving them from smog(ground-level ozone) and fine particulate matter (dust) that causerespiratory and cardiovascular distress. Improved Health: Reducing emissions of fine particulate matterwill prolong thousands of lives and prevent thousands of new casesof chronic bronchitis, hospitalizations and emergency room visits.Reducing the formation of ground-level ozone, or smog, will bringhealthier air to tens of millions of people, and reduce the numberof ozone-related health problems such as respiratory infection,asthma attacks, and chronic lung damage. Reducing mercury emissionswill reduce the risk of toxic effects from mercury exposure tochildren exposed during their mother's pregnancy. Better Environmental Protection from Acid Rain, Smog, Haze,Mercury and Nitrogen Deposition: Reducing SO2 and NOx emissionswill save hundreds of northeastern lakes and hundreds of thousandsof acres of forests from acid rain, particularly in the Adirondacksand other parts of the Appalachian Mountains. It will also improvevisibility over much of the country, particularly the scenic vistasin national parks such the Grand Canyon. Reducing emissions ofnitrogen oxides will also reduce nitrogen deposition in water,improving coastal ecosystem health along the East and Gulf coasts.Reducing mercury emissions will reduce mercury deposition in lakesand streams. Secure, Affordable Power: The Clear Skies Initiative will keepelectricity costs low for consumers by saving as much as $1 billioneach year in compliance costs. Power generators will have theflexibility to reduce emissions in the most cost-effective way. Itwill also encourage the continual improvement in technology toreduce emissions from coal-fired power plants in concert with theDepartment of Energy's Clean Coal Technology program and incentivesfor power plants that install "scrubbers" early in the program.Under the Clear Skies Initiative, America will continue to have adiverse fuel mix that ensures a reliable, affordable energysupply.HOW THE CLEAR SKIES INITIATIVE WORKSTo improve air quality for millions of Americans, the ClearSkies Initiative will adopt the lessons learned from 30 years ofenvironmental regulation by:1. Establishing Emission Reduction Targets, Based on SoundScience, That Will Significantly Improve Air Quality, ProtectingHuman and Environmental Health: By reducing air pollution, andconducting constant monitoring of emissions, the Clear SkiesInitiative guarantees that America's power plants will meetambitious air quality goals, even as they bring new power plants online to meet growing demand. During the first phase, the EPAAdministrator will review new scientific, technology and costinformation and, if necessary, adjust the phase two targets. Thiswill include a vigorous research program to further understand thefate and transport of pollutants in the atmosphere.2. Adopting a Comprehensive, Integrated, Multi-PollutantApproach: By reducing emissions of the three key sources of airpollution at the same time, the Clear Skies Initiative will produceenvironmental results more effectively and efficiently than thecurrent labyrinth of overlapping and uncoordinated single-pollutantrequirements. The current approach is inefficient and ineffective,imposing unnecessarily high costs due to: (1) stranded capitalinvestments from the installation of controls that later becomeobsolete when additional requirements are promulgated; (2) reducedlead time for complying with those requirements; (3) limited ornon-existent flexibility for emissions trading to allowcost-efficient control options; and (4) a reliance upon lengthy,expensive, and uncertain litigation to sort out regulatoryambiguity and compliance with the law.3. Improving Environmental Performance at Lower Cost UsingMarket-Based Mechanisms That Create Incentives for Innovation:Using the market-based mechanism of a cap-and-trade program, theClear Skies Initiative will establish national, federallyenforceable emissions limits for each pollutant. Allowances aredistributed to electricity generators, and the cap declines atspecific intervals, 2010, and then again in 2018. Generatorsrespond by gradually reducing their emissions - reducing more thanthe cap requires early in the program in order to save allowancesfor use later in the program when the caps decline. That is,generators respond to declining allowance caps just like peoplerespond to declining income when they're planning for retirement:they do more now, investing and saving for the future. Individualgenerators can choose when to reduce their emissions in response totheir particular circumstances and the price of allowances they seein the market. This encourages the least expensive reductions overtime as well as across facilities.At this point, the government only has to enforce the emissionlimits, distribute allowances and verify that each facility hassufficient allowances for their annual emissions. There's no needfor lengthy, costly, uncertain litigation to enforce the law.Creative, innovative strategies to reduce emissions are immediatelyrewarded: facilities save money by finding innovative ways toreduce emissions more than a command-and-control law would require.This creates an incentive for continual improvement inenvironmental performance.The flexibility in the process of allocating emission credits orallowances will also accommodate the different air quality needs inthe East and the West while preserving fair competition. Westernstates have already made significant headway in identifying futureSO2 reductions necessary to meet air quality goals in the WesternRegional Air Partnership ("WRAP") agreement between EPA, Westernstates, tribes, industry and environmental groups. SO2 allocationswill track this agreement. NOx reduction caps for the East and Westwill also be set to accommodate these different needs, and separateEast and West trading regions will be created.4. Ensuring a secure, affordable energy supply: By setting firmcaps while offering flexibility in how utilities can meet thosecaps, the Clear Skies Initiative preserves a diverse fuel mix thatsupports economic growth with reasonably priced energy. The firmcaps and the adequate lead time create a predictable climate forlong-term planning and capital investment in power generation,which will ensure an adequate energy supply. This will also createsubstantial cost savings to consumers.THE CAP AND TRADE SYSTEM IN THE CLEAR SKIES INITIATIVEHOW DOES IT WORK?The Clear Skies Initiative will deliver substantial health andenvironmental benefits through a market-based approach that rewardsinnovation, reduces costs, and ensures results. Instead of thegovernment telling electricity generators precisely where and howto reduce their emissions- the old command-and-control approach - this market-basedprogram tells them when and how much to reduce pollution byestablishing a firm, maximum "cap" on emissions. The tradingprogram creates incentives for electricity generators to reducetheir emissions even more than the law requires, and more quicklythan required. Electricity generators must hold an "allowance" foreach ton of pollution they emit - one ton, one allowance. Thegovernment controls the number of allowances that are distributedand reduces them over time. Electricity generators must continuallymonitor and report their emissions.Most importantly, these allowances can be traded freely. Thatmeans that if you're smart and creative, and you figure out abetter way to reduce emissions, you get rewarded by making thosereductions and selling unneeded allowances in the market. And, ifyou unexpectedly can't reduce emissions as much as planned, youhave the flexibility to go out and buy more allowances in themarket - all without any government interference, and withoutundermining air quality. This flexibility lets businesses figureout the cheapest way to reduce emissions while government sticks tosetting the overall emission cap at a level that guarantees thatindustry meets ambitious air quality goals.WHY DOES IT WORK?The cap ensures that the reductions in SO2, NOx and mercuryrequired by the Clear Skies Initiative are achieved and maintainedover time even as new power plants are built. The open tradingprogram gives power plants the flexibility to choose how they meettheir target emission reductions, which minimizes compliance costsand lowers consumer electricity prices.WHAT ARE THE RESULTS?Cost savings - The acid rain cap and trade program passedby Congress in 1990 achieved reductions at two-thirds the cost ofachieving the same reductions under a command-and-control system.This program reduced more pollution in the last decade than allother Clean Air Act command-and-control programs combined duringthe same period.Innovation - Trading under the acid rain program createdfinancial incentives for electricity generators to look for new andlow-cost ways to reduce emissions and to do so early.Integrity -The acid rain cap and trade program has highaccountability and transparency. Electricity generators mustinstall monitors to prove that they have sufficient allowances tomatch their actual emissions.Regional Effect - The acid rain program resulted in emissionreductions well below the cap in the areas that contribute most ofthe sulfur in acid rain. Comparing emissions from the 263 powerplants regulated in the first phase of the program in 1999 withthose in 1990, the North Central, Southeast and Mid-Atlanticregions achieved 49 percent, 48 percent and 43 percent reductionsin SO2 respectively. Several analyses of trading under the acidrain program have concluded that the program did not result inlocal areas with higher emission levels ("hot spots").Guaranteed Results - The Acid Rain program enjoys nearly 100percent compliance and only takes 75 EPA employees to run - a trackrecord no command-and-control program can meet. Reductions in theearly years averaged 25 percent below the required cap. Emissioncuts resulted in air quality improvements over a broad area of theU.S. and significant reductions in acid rain.Emissions From Power Plants in the First Phase of the Acid RainProgram10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0Sulfur dioxide emissions were far below allowable levels duringPhase I.1980 1985 1990 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999WHAT THE EXPERTS SAY ABOUT THE ACID RAIN CAP AND TRADEPROGRAM"The data confirm a general prediction about cap-and-tradeprograms, that they will tend to create incentives for the dirtiestplants to clean up the most, as the per-ton cost of emissionsreductions may be expected to be the least. The data show that, ifanything, trading may be expected to cool hot spots and not createthem."--Byron Swift, Environmental Law Institute, "Allowance Tradingand Potential Hot Spots - Good News from the Acid Rain Program" 31Environment Reporter, pp. 954-959, May 12, 2000."The superior environmental and economic results of ...theProgram are precisely what should have been expected of a programthat matched an explicit emissions limit with a market that turnedpollution reductions into marketable assets."--From "Obstacle to Opportunity: How Acid Rain Emissions Tradingis Delivering Cleaner Air", Environmental Defense, September 2000,p. 2."The flexibility of the trading program has encouraged utilitiesto capitalize on advantageous trends, such as changing fuel pricesand technological innovation that might have been delayed ordiscouraged by traditional regulatory approaches."--Curtis Carlson, Dallas Burtraw, et al., "Sulfur DioxideControl By Electric Utilities: What are the Gains from Trade?"Resources for the Future, July 1998, Revised April 2000."[The] simplicity [of the Program] has kept transaction costslow and helped to create efficiencies that might otherwise notexist."--Daniel Chartier, Former Emission Trading Manager, WisconsinElectric, Congressional Testimony, July 1997."This grand experiment [emissions trading under the Acid RainProgram] has demonstrated that the government can be effective andnon-intrusive."--Danny Ellerman, Executive Director, Massachusetts Institute ofTechnology Center for Energy and Environmental Policy Research,remarks at the 21st Conference of the International Association forEnergy Economics, Quebec City, Canada, May 1998.