Session 2.Identifying ED Patients with Alcohol ProblemsRobert Woolard, MDMany patients in the emergency department (ED) have alcoholproblems, and they can be identified.1 Research on techniques usedto identify these patients has been conducted, but several areas ofinterest should be addressed by further research. We need tofurther examine and refine alcohol-screening questionnaires in theED. We need to determine the sequence and combination of questionsand tests that constitute the best screening process. We need tostudy barriers to screening, identify factors that promotescreening implementation, and demonstrate the impact of a screeningprogram in the ED. The final aim of screening must be improvedoutcomes through referral and counseling. Identification is onlythe first step in a process of care.Alcohol problems definedAlcohol problems designate a spectrum from risk behavior toillness, and from problematic consumption to alcohol use disorder.We must be careful when interpreting the results of studies, and inour own design of screening procedures, that we are clear about theendpoints we are measuring. Clinicians in the ED are interested inscreening for several alcohol endpoints. Acute intoxication is ofconcern to emergency physicians. Intoxication in a driver wouldcertainly be considered an "alcohol problem." The blood or breathalcohol concentration (BAC), coupled with our clinicalobservations, may help us identify intoxication. Most alcoholscreening tests identify patients with alcohol use disorders orproblematic consumption of alcohol. The American PsychiatricAssociation in DSM III-R, IV2 and the World Health Organization(WHO) in the 9th and 10th International Classification of Diseases(ICD-9, -10) have rigorously defined alcohol abuse and alcoholdependence.3 These definitions largely agree for dependence, butnot for abuse. DSM includes social and legal consequences of abuseand ICD-10 has only medical and psychological consequences. Fewercases of alcohol abuse meet the ICD-10 definition. In general, analcohol use disorder is present when an aspect of the patient'sfunction has been compromisedby alcohol. Before function is compromised, problematicconsumption occurs. Much of the emphasis of screening has shiftedtoward identifying patients with high alcohol consumption beforedisease develops. WHO defines hazardous drinking as 4 or moredrinks/day for men and 2 or more drinks/day for women. The NationalInstitute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) defines at-riskdrinking as consumption of more than 14 drinks/week or more than 4drinks/occasion for men ages 18 to 65. For women of all ages andmen older than age 65, more than 7 drinks/week or more than 3drinks/occasion is considered at risk. Binge drinking alone is alsoof concern and has been variably defined as more than 3, 4, 5, or 6drinks on an occasion.4Characteristics of an ideal ED screening test or sequence oftestsAn ideal screening test would be accurate, practical, andmotivational. The accuracy of a test can be measured in severalways. For a screening test, high sensitivity is the most desirableparameter. High sensitivity ensures that most of the patients withproblems will be detected. High specificity is also desirable tohelp ensure that positive tests represent real problems. There is atrade off between sensitivity and specificity defined by thereceiver operator curve. The area under the operator curve bestreflects the performance of a test; the larger the area the betterthe test. Each point on the curve represents a potential "cutpoint." A cut point with a high sensitivity and specificity shouldbe manifest in an ideal test.Theoretically, an ideal test should remain accurate throughoutthe alcohol use spectrum. However, real tests don't performuniformly across a spectrum. For example, if we're interested inidentifying patients with binge drinking, we can define bingedrinking as 3, 4, 5, or 6 drinks on an occasion. Screening testsdesigned for patients with more severe problems (6 drinks) will beless sensitive at identifying patients with less severe problems (3drinks).An ideal test would perform uniformly in all populations andsub-groups. However, when we screen populations with high caserates (trauma admissions, 63%),5 a highly sensitive test withmoderate specificity performs well. The same test used to screen apopulation with low case rates (pregnant clinic patients, 7%)6 doesnot perform as well. In this population, a test with higherspecificity may be needed to avoidtoo many false positives. A test that is used to screen adiverse population (such as ED patients) will perform better insome subgroups than others based of the different case rates amongsubgroups.An ideal test should remain accurate in the presence of commonED problems, such as stress, injury, acute illness, intoxication,other drug use, depression, and anxiety disorders. Many of thescreening tests were developed outside the ED. Fortunately, manyhave been applied to ED populations. Hence, their performance hasbeen demonstrated in the presence of some of these distractingfactors. An ideal test should also remain accurate with differencesin gender, age, race, ethnicity, or language. Some variation intest performance among demographic groups has been demonstrated instudies of screening tests in the ED.7,8 An ideal test in the EDwould address both current and lifetime alcohol problems. Currentuse would more likely prompt referral or counseling, but past usepredicts poor outcome from medical problems such as injury.9In research trials, the impracticality of a screening test maynot be evident. Research staff do not have to contend with adding ascreening test to an already lengthy list of clinical care duties.In clinical practice, several practical issues will make all thedifference to successful implementation. The ease of use of ascreening test will determine its success. Staff with any level ofprior health training and little additional training should be ableto administer an ideal test. Results should be immediatelyavailable and easy to interpret. The test should be acceptable toregulators, payers, ED staff, and ED patients.Several factors may interfere with implementation. For example,patients may find certain questions offensive, or they may not bewilling to have blood drawn or submit to breathalyzers. Clinicalstaff may be uncomfortable asking some types of questions.Regulators may restrict access to records based on answers tocertain questions and add burdens to hospital record-keepers.Payers may pay for some tests and not others. These and otherfactors may reduce the effectiveness of a screening procedure thathas been proven effective in research trials.Most experts agree that an ideal ED test is brief (1 to 2minutes). Most of the quest to develop efficient ED screening hasemphasized brevity. However, a longer test could beself-administered. An ideal screening test should not interferewith the routine sequence of medical history, physical examination,and laboratory testing. The test should beconfidential since there may be legal, financial, or socialconsequences to screening positive. Finally, the ideal test shouldactually motivate the patient to further assessment, counseling, orreferral as needed.Currently available screening testsBased on current evidence, screening should be undertaken usingone or a combination of structured questionnaires.10 Screeningundertaken using clinical impression or biochemical tests is not asaccurate or as sensitive as structured questionnaires foridentifying alcohol use disorders or problematic consumption.7 Ofcourse, BAC can help identify acute intoxication. The alcoholconcentration can be determined by saliva testing, breath analysis,or blood test.11,12Clinical impressionClinicians often use their general impression to help withdiagnosis, but clinical impressions concerning alcohol problems canbe inaccurate. Trained practitioners counseling alcoholics couldidentify only 50% of acutely intoxicated patients.13 Primary carephysicians and emergency physicians identified fewer than 50% ofpatients with alcohol problems. Unfortunately, the majority ofphysicians (54%) screen only those patients they suspect based ontheir clinical impressions.14-16 Stereotypic profiling may be theconsequence of screening only suspected patients. Gentilelloreported that in a trauma center ED, staff suspected alcohol-ism in26% of patients who screened negative on structured questionnaires.These patients were more likely to be young, male, disheveled,uninsured, and low income.17 Of course, some ED patients mayspontaneously volunteer information about drinking. Cherpitelreported that patient self-report of drinking prior to arrival hada sensitivity of 29% for alcohol problems in the ED.7Structured questionnairesSelf-report may be enhanced when specific alcohol questions areasked. Cyr reported that a single question in a primary caresetting-"Have you ever had a drinking problem?"-had a highsensitivity (40% to 70%).18 Subsequent reports from otherinstitutions did not replicate the high sensitivity of this singlequestion.19-23 Cherpitel evaluated single question screens in theED and found them to be less sensitive than structuredquestionnaires.7Most existing screens were developed for primary care settingsto detect alcohol use disorders. The CAGE was developed in 1968 asa brief screening tool for primary care providers to detect alcoholabuse and dependence. CAGE is a mnemonic from four questions, Cutdown, Annoyed, Guilty, and Eye opener. The questions addressproblems over the patient's lifetime. CAGE takes 1 to 2 minutes toadminister.24,25The MAST (Michigan Alcohol-Screening Test), developed in 1971 asa screen for alcohol abuse and dependence, has 24 yes/no questions.MAST has been self-administered and used in a computer format. Itaddresses problems over the patient's lifetime. MAST requires 20minutes to administer. A shortened version of the MAST exists, a10-question Brief (B) MAST. BMAST takes 5 to 12 minutes toadminister and performs nearly as well as the longerversion.26-28SAAST (Self-Administered Alcoholism Screening Test) wasdeveloped in 1972 to screen for alcohol abuse and dependence. Ithas 35 yes/no questions. While lengthy, the SAAST has the advantageof being self-administered, and it has also been administered in acomputerized format. It addresses problems over the patient'slifetime. A shortened, 9-item version, the Brief SAAST, takes thepatient 5 to 10 minutes to complete.29,30More recently, screens have been developed to detect at-riskdrinkers. WHO developed the AUDIT (Alcohol Use DisorderIdentification Test) in 1992 as a brief screening tool to detectat-risk drinking in addition to alcohol abuse and dependence. AUDIThas 10 questions. It assesses problems experienced within the lastthree months and over the patient's lifetime. AUDIT takes 4 to 8minutes to administer.31,32Several screens have been developed for pregnant women. Concernabout even lower levels of alcohol consumption in this group hasprompted development of the screens TWEAK, T-ACE, and NET. TWEAKscreens for alcohol abuse and dependence. It has five questions,addresses problems over the patient's lifetime, and takes 3 to 5minutes to administer.33 T-ACE also screens for alcohol abuse anddependence. T-ACE has three of the four CAGE questions and replacesthe guilt question with tolerance question. T-ACE addressesproblems over the patient's lifetime and takes 1 to 2 minutes toadminister.34 NET was developed to screen pregnant patients forat-risk drinking, alcohol abuse, and dependence. It is athree-question screen that takes about 1 minute.33One screen has been developed for emergency department use, theRapid Alcohol Assessment Screen (RAPS4). Cherpitel screened an EDpopulation with questions from CAGE, BMAST, AUDIT, and TWEAK. Shecreated RAPS4 by combining the four highest-yield questions fromthose screens, which covered feeling guilty after drinking,blackouts, failing to do what is normally expected after drinking,and morning drinking. However, this new instrument has not beenstudied when administered as a stand-alone test.35In addition to these questionnaires, NIAAA suggests that allprimary care physicians ask an opening question-"Do you drinkalcohol?"- followed by three questions about alcohol consumptionand then the CAGE. This sequence was not explicitly designed orstudied as a "screening test." D'Onofrio and others haverecommended using the NIAAA approach in the ED.10Studies of screening testsCherpitel conducted two studies comparing multiple screeningtests in the ED. In the first study, TWEAK and AUDIT were mostsensitive, identifying 84% and 81% of patients, respectively, withan ICD-10 diagnosis of alcohol dependence.7 In the second study,RAPS and AUDIT were more sensitive than TWEAK and CAGE, identifying79% and 78% compared with 72% and 71%, respectively, of patientswith an ICD-10 or DSM-IV diagnosis of alcohol dependence, harmfuldrinking, or abuse.5,36Soderstrom has compared multiple screening tests in a traumacenter. He reported that CAGE performed best, with a sensitivity of84%, for a DSM-IV diagnosis of alcohol dependence.37 Fiellinreviewed 38 studies of screening for alcohol use disorder in theprimary care setting. For at-risk, hazardous, or harmful drinking,AUDIT was found most effective with sensitivities of 51% to 97%.For alcohol abuse or dependence, CAGE was found most effective withsensitivities of 43% to 94%. As expected, CAGE and AUDIT performedbest within the spectrum of alcohol use they were developed toexplore.38Screening biasesCherpitel analyzed variability of test performance in subgroupsof ED patients.39 In her first ED study, CAGE, BMAST, AUDIT, andTWEAK were less sensitive among females, whites, and non-injuredpatients. Inher second ED study with Hispanic patients, CAGE, BMAST, AUDIT,TWEAK, and RAPS were less sensitive in females, patients with lessacculturation, and non-dependent drinkers.36 Lowering the cut pointon these screening instruments improved sensitivity without loss ofspecificity among females. Using lower cut points for females maymaximize screening test performance.40Bradley reviewed nine studies with data on women's responses toscreening mainly in primary care settings. CAGE, AUDIT, and TWEAKwere the best tests for alcohol dependence among women. Theirreported sensitivities were 66% to 92%. All three screens performedbetter among black women than among white women. TWEAK per-formedbetter than CAGE or AUDIT among white women. CAGE and AUDIT had lowsensitivities (59% and 48% respectively) for alcohol dependenceamong white women. We must be careful not to employ screeningtechniques that do not address important subgroups.41Evidence of such low sensitivity in an important subgroup maynecessitate use of multiple screens tailored to subgroups. Inaddition to women, other subgroups such as adolescents, olderadults, pregnant women, psychiatric patients, and Spanish speakersmay need screening with modified or unique tests. Standard screensmay not perform as well in these patient subgroups that mayrepresent a considerable part of the ED population. Adjustment ofcut points or use of alternative screening tests may be necessaryfor these subgroups.Alcohol concentrationMany injured ED patients are screened with a BAC, which can helpidentify intoxication. The presence of alcohol may not alwaysindicate an alcohol problem. While a very high BAC in an unimpairedpatient can be a specific screen for dependence,42 BAC is aninsensitive screen for an alcohol use disorder. One study foundthat only one-third of intoxicated drivers had an alcohol usedisorder.43 In an ED study, BAC was a poor screen for alcohol abuseor dependence with a sensitivity of 20%, less sensitive thanself-reported drinking.7 In another ED study, a saliva alcohollevel equivalent to a BAC greater than 0.10 g/dl in an injuredpatient identified harmful drinkers (AUDIT > 8) with a sensitivity of 65%.44 In one traumacenter, BAC had a sensitivity of 63% for an alcohol disorder.5Other biochemical markers such as mean corpuscular volume, plateletcount, liver enzymes, gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT),aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase(ALT), and carbohydrate deficient transferrin (CDT) perform poorlywith sensitivities of 13% to 67% for alcohol use disorders orproblematic con-sumption.45-50 Biochemical tests other than BAC mayhave use in settings other than an ED, but they offer little asscreening tests for ED patients.Research questions: improving existing screeningquestionnairesWe still need to find the most accurate test for ED use. Thismay be RAPS4, which is designed for the ED, but it needs furtherdirect testing. Many tests would be improved by wording questionsto address current problems (the past year or three months) ratherthan lifetime problems. Screening with embedded questions andindirect questions may also improve self-report among adolescentsand other groups.20,51-53 These approaches need further testing inthe ED.The most practical test may be the shortest, the three-questionNET. Further sequencing of questions within questionnaires may alsoimprove efficiency.35 If one question answered "yes" yields apositive test score, asking that one first and stopping as soon asthe score is positive would be the most efficient approach.Cherpitel has analyzed the sensitivity of each of the RAPS4questions and sequenced them from most to least sensitive for mostefficient use.35Minimizing question sets for interviews will result in obtainingless information. Computer-administered or self-administeredscreens may address this issue by allowing patients to spend moretime completing in-depth questioning with no additional stafftime.54,55 This approach promises practical avenues for obtainingmore information. A trial of screening tests in various formats(e.g., interview, self-administered forms, and computerinteraction) should be undertaken to compare their cost and valuein the ED.The most motivational screening test is unknown. Drawing bloodand confronting patients with their blood alcohol levels mayactually push them away from counseling. Screening questions thatreveal the negative consequences or link alcohol to currentproblems may motivate patients to seek counseling. Providingimmediate feedback may help make the transition from screening tocounseling with little additional intervention. The motivationalaspects of a variety of screens, with and without verbal orcomputer feedback, need to be explored.Research questions: finding the best approach to screeningTo determine the best of the available screens, a multi-centertrial with a broad demographic mix and a large number of patientssubjected to different screens is needed. Further evaluation shouldbe performed of lower cut points for TWEAK, CAGE, and AUDIT. Theadvantage of tailored screens or specific questions for subgroupssuch as women,41 adolescents,54-59 and elders,60-64 needs to bedetermined. RAPS4 must be further tested as a stand-alone screen inisolation and against other tests. A longer, self-administeredscreen-including one administered by computer-should also be testedin the ED.To determine the best sequence for screening, the approachrecommended by NIAAA for primary care should be compared with othersequences. Several trials of variations of the NIAAA approach arewarranted. Trials should be conducted starting with other or noopening questions, using other consumption questions such as thosein AUDIT, using other screens such as TWEAK rather than CAGE,changing the sequence to CAGE or TWEAK followed by consumptionquestions, and checking BAC at the beginning or end of theprotocol.The best screen should be determined in the context of ascreening and intervention program. Some questions or screens maylead naturally to referral and treatment. Others may not promotereferral and treatment. Much of the screening literature isisolated from intervention. Future studies need to incorporateevaluation of screening linked to intervention protocols.Barriers to implementing screeningIn a research protocol in England, nurses were trained to screenall emergency patients with CAGE and then provide feedback. Only20% of patients were screened. Of them, 19% had positive CAGEscores; of those, only 41% were provided feedback. Even withfeedback, only 12% accepted follow-up. Of 4,663 patients, only 13were entered into the trial and the trial was abandoned.65,66There are multiple barriers to screening. Nurses identified lackof resources, inadequate training, stress, poor morale, and noperceived value to the intervention. In a survey sponsored by theWest Virginia Chapter of the American College of EmergencyPhysicians, a minority of emergency physicians reported routinescreening and counseling of ED patients.67 The authors reportedprovider attitudes of disinterest,avoidance, disdain, and pessimism as well as inadequate time,insufficient education, and lack of resources as barriers. Surveysand interventions should be undertaken to define and reducebarriers to implementing screening in clinical practice.Currently, screening is a research tool, not a clinical tool. EDstaff does not use structured questionnaires for alcohol screening.ED staff has no systematic approach to alcohol screening. Staffchooses to screen some individuals and not others based on clinicalsuspicions or partially implemented protocols. In general, ED staffscreens less often than addiction experts recommend.Universal screening is appropriate in populations with high caserates. EDs have reported high case rates of alcohol problems,especially acute intoxication, from 9% to 31%.17,28,46,68-71 Withinthe ED, there are even higher case rates in subgroups. Majortrauma, injuries, assaults,72 depression, and alcohol-relatedmedical problems like gastrointestinal bleeding or seizures defineeven higher risk subgroups. Many experts advocate focusingscreening on some of the highest-risk groups or screening withgreater intensity and different tools in these groups.Implementing screening in clinical practiceAny ED staff member could be assigned the screening task.Physician, nurse, clerical, social work, or volunteer staff canconduct screening. We do not know which staff group will be mosteffective. Self-administered questionnaires, computer screeninteractions, or interview techniques may be easier to implement.Screening questions can be stand-alone or embedded into generalhealth questionnaires or existing registration, physician, andnurse documentation. Screening protocols can be mandatory orvoluntary. The approaches that will be most effective in EDpractice should be determined by studying the implementation ofthese strategies in actual ED clinical practices. Studies of thetranslation of efficacious research practice into clinical practiceis needed most since screening instruments have been used byresearch staff and not clinical staff.Impact of screeningED patient care should be improved by implementing alcoholscreening programs. A major limit to realizing this improvement isthe lack of counseling available to address patients' alcoholproblems in most EDs.Most EDs provide very limited alcohol services. When care isunavailable, screening makes little sense to clinicians. Realizinga gain from screening in an ED is entirely dependent upon linkingthe screening program to some form of counseling, onsite or throughreferral services. The impact of screening should be demonstratedin ED environments that have treatment available, an adequatevolume of alcohol-involved patients, and the capacity to undertakeclinical trials. Studies in these centers should demonstrate thebenefits of screening: increased referrals, more patients receivingcounseling, and better outcomes such as reduction of riskbehaviors.Summary: research areas of interest concerning screeningThe ideal screen that is accurate, practical, and motivationalhas not been developed. Researchers must continue to analyze theperformance of structured questionnaires and try computer-basedscreening tools in the ED. The sequence of screening tests needs tobe evaluated by studying the NIAAA approach and severalalternatives. Screening must move from research to clinicalpractice. Barriers to screening in clinical practice must beidentified and removed. Studies of implementation of screeningprograms in ED clinical practice should be undertaken. The impactof screening on referral and intervention, as well as outcomes suchas reduced risk behaviors, must be demonstrated.References1. Lowenstein S, Koziol-McLain J, Thompson M, et al. Behavioralrisk factors in emergency department patients: a multisite survey.Acad Emerg Med 1998; 5:781-7.2. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and StatisticalManual of Mental Disorders. Washington (DC): American PsychiatricPress; 1994.3. Spitzer R, Williams J, Gibbon M, et al. User's Guide for theStructured Clinical Interview for DSM-III-R. Washington (DC):American Psychiatric Press; 1990.4. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. ThePhysician's Guide to Helping Patients with Alcohol Problems.Washington (DC): U.S. Department of Health and Human Services;1995. NIH Publication No. 95-3769.5. Soderstrom C, Smith GS, Kufera JA, et al. The accuracy ofthe CAGE, the Brief Michigan Alcoholism Screening Test, and theAlcohol Use Disorders Identification Test in screening traumacenter patients for alcoholism. J Trauma 1997;43:962-9.6. Gale T, Ja W, Welty T. Differences in detection of alcoholuse in a prenatal population (on a Northern Plains IndianReservation) using various methods of ascertainment. South DakotaJournal of Medicine 1998;51:235-40.7. Cherpitel C. Screening for alcohol problems in the emergencydepartment. Ann Emerg Med 1995;26:158-66.8. Cherpitel C. Comparison of screening instruments for alcoholproblems between black and white emergency room patients from tworegions of the country. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 1997;21:1391-7.9. Jurkovich G, Rivara F, Gurney J, et al. The effects of acutealcohol intoxication and chronic alcohol abuse on outcome fromtrauma. JAMA 1993;270:51-6.10. D'Onofrio G, Bernstein E, Bernstein J, et al. Patients withalcohol problems in the emergency department, part 1: improvingdetection. Acad Emerg Med 1998; 5:1200-9.11. Gibb K, Yee A, Martin S, et al. Accuracy and usefulness ofthe breath alcohol analyzer. Ann Emerg Med 1984;13:516-20.12. Gibb K. Serum alcohol levels, toxicology screens, and useof the breath alcohol analyzer. Ann Emerg Med 1986;15:349-53.13. Sobel M, Sobel L, VanderSpeck R. Relationships amongclinical judgement, self-report and breath analysis measures ofintoxication in alcoholics. J Consult Clin Psychol1979;47:205-6.14. Becker B, Woolard RH, Nirenberg TD, Minugh A, Longabaugh R,Clifford P. Alcohol use among subcritically injured emergencydepartment patients. Acad Emerg Med 1995;2:784-90.15. Rydon P, Redman S, Sanson-Fisher R, Reid A. Detection ofalcohol-related problems in general practice. J Stud Alcohol1992;53:197-202.16. Isaacson J, Butler R, Zacharek M, Tzelepis A. A screeningwith the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT) in aninner-city population. J Gen Intern Med 1994;9:550-3.17. Gentilello L, Villaveces A, Ries RR, et al. Detection ofacute alcohol intoxication and chronic alcohol dependence by traumacenter staff. J Trauma 1999; 47:1131-9.18. Cyr M, Wartman S. The effectiveness of routine screeningquestions in the detection of alcoholism. JAMA 1988;259:51-4.19. Fleming M, Barry K. The effectiveness of alcoholismscreening in an ambulatory care setting. J Stud Alcohol1991;52:33-6.20. Fleming M, Barry K. A three-sample test of a masked alcoholscreening questionnaire. Alcohol 1991;26:81-91.21. Moran M, Naughton B, Hughes S. Screening elderly veteransfor alcoholism. J Gen Intern Med 1990;5:361-4.22. Schorling J, Willems J, Klas P. Identifying problemdrinkers: lack of sensitivity of the two-question drinking test. AmJ Med 1995;98:232-6.23. Taj N, Devera-Sales A, Vinson DC. Screening for problemdrinking: does a single question work? J Fam Pract1998;46:328-35.24. Ewing J. Detecting alcoholism: the CAGE questionnaire.JAMA. 1984;252: 1905-7.25. Mayfield D, McLeod G, Hall P. The CAGE questionnaire:validation of a new alcohol screening instrument. Am J Psychiatry1974;131:1121-3.26. Pokorny A, Miller B, Kaplan H. The Brief MAST: a shortenedversion of the Michigan Alcoholism Screening Test. Am J Psychiatry1972;129:342-8.27. Selzer M. The Michigan Alcoholism Screening Test: the questfor a new diagnostic instrument. Am J Psychiatry1971;127:1653-8.28. Selzer M, Vinokur A, van Rooijen M. A self-administeredShort Michigan Alcoholism Screening Test (SMAST). J Stud Alcohol1975;36:117-26.29. Davis L, Jr., Hurt R, Morse R, O'Brien P. Discriminantanalysis of the Self-Administered Alcoholism Screening Test.Alcohol Clin Exp Res 1987;11:269-73.30. Davis L, Jr., Morse R. Self-Administered AlcoholismScreening Test: a comparison of conventional versuscomputer-administered formats. Alcohol Clin Exp Res1991;15:155-7.31. Saunders J, Aasland O, Amundsen A, Grant M. Alcoholconsumption and related problems among primary health carepatients: WHO Collaborative Project on Early Detection of PersonsWith Harmful Alcohol Consumption, I. Addiction 1993;88:349-62.32. Saunders J, Aasland O, Babor T, De La Fuente J, Grant M.Development of the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test(AUDIT). Addiction 1993;88:791-804.33. Russell M, Martier S, Sokol R, et al. Screening forpregnancy risk-drinking. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 1994;18:1156-61.34. Sokol R, Martier S, Ager J. The T-ACE questions: practicalprenatal detection of risk-drinking. Am J Obstet Gynecol1989;160:863-70.35. Cherpitel C. A brief screening instrument for problemdrinking in the emergency room: the RAPS4. Rapid Alcohol ProblemsScreen. J Stud Alcohol 2000;61:447-9.36. Cherpitel C. Differences in performance of screeninginstruments for problem drinking among blacks, whites and Hispanicsin an emergency room population. J Stud Alcohol 1998;59:420-6.37. Soderstrom CA, Smith GH, Kufera JA, et al. The accuracy ofthe CAGE, the Brief Michigan Alcohol Screening Test, and theAlcohol Use Disorders Identification Test in screening traumacenter patients for alcoholism. J Trauma 1997; 43:962-9.38. Fiellin DA, Reid MC, O'Connor PG. Screening for alcoholproblems in primary care: a systematic review. Arch Intern Med2000;160:1977-89.39. Cherpitel C, Clark W. Ethnic differences in performance ofscreening instruments for identifying harmful drinking and alcoholdependence in the emergency room. Alcohol Clin Exp Res1995;19:628-34.40. Cherpitel C. Analysis of cut points for screeninginstruments for alcohol problems in the emergency room. J StudAlcohol 1995;56:695-700.41. Bradley KA, Boyd-Wickizer J, Powell SH, Burman ML. Alcoholscreening questionnaires in women. JAMA 1998;280:166-71.42. National Criteria Committee, National Council onAlcoholism. Criteria for the diagnosis of alcoholism. Am JPsychiatry 1972;129:127-35.43. Gijbers A, Raymond A, Whelan G, et al. Does a blood alcohollevel of 0.15 or more identify accurately problem drinkers in adrunk-driver population? Med J Aust 1991;154:448-52.44. Clifford P, Sparadeo F, Minugh P, et al. Identification ofhazardous/harmful drinking among subcritically injured patients.Acad Emerg Med 1996;3:239-45.45. Cleary P, Miller M, Bush B, Warburg M, Delbanco T, AronsonM. Prevalence and recognition of alcohol abuse in a primary carepopulation. Am J Med 1988; 85:466-71.46. Escobar F, Espi F, Canteras M. Diagnostic tests foralcoholism in primary health care: compared efficacy of differentinstruments. Drug Alcohol Depend 1995;40:151-8.47. Reynaud M, Schellenberg F, Loisequx-Meunier M-N, et al.Objective diagnosis of alcohol abuse: compared values ofcarbohydrate-deficient transferrin (CDT), gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT), and mean corpuscular volume (MCV). Alcohol ClinExp Res 2000;24:1414-9.48. Aithal G, Thornes H, Dwarakanath A, Tanner A. Measurementof carbohydrate-deficient transferrin (CDT) in a general medicalclinic: is this test useful in assessing alcohol consumption?Alcohol. 1998;33:304-9.49. Sillanaukee P, Aalto M, Seppa K. Carbohydrate-deficienttransferrin and conventional alcohol markers as indicators forbrief intervention among heavy drinkers in primary health care.Alcohol Clin Exp Res 1998;22:892-6.50. Yersin B, Nicolet J-F, Decrey H, Burner M, Melle G, PecoudA. Screening for excessive alcohol drinking: comparative value ofcarbohydrate-deficient transferrin, gamma-glutamyltransferase, andmean corpuscular volume. Arch Intern Med 1995;155:1907-11.51. Broadhead W, Leon A, Weissman M, et al. Development andvalidation of the SDDS-PC screen for multiple mental disorders inprimary care. Arch Fam Med 1995;4:211-9.52. Leon A, Olfson M, Weissman M, et al. Brief screens formental disorders in primary care. J Gen Intern Med.1996;11:426-30.53. Hore B, Alsafar J, Wilkins R. An attempt atcriterion-oriented validation of an alcoholism questionnaire ingeneral practice. Br J Addict 1977;72:19-22.54. Smith D, Collins M, Kreisberg J, Volpicelli J, Alterman A.Screening for problem drinking in college freshmen. J Am CollHealth 1987;36:89-94.55. Heck E. Developing a screening questionnaire for problemdrinking in college students. J Am Coll Health 1991;39:227-31.56. Kokotailo P, Adger H, Jr., Duggan A, Repke J, Joffe A.Cigarette, alcohol, and other drug use by school-age pregnantadolescents: prevalence, detection, and associated risk factors.Pediatrics 1992;90:328-34.57. Werner M, Walker L, Greene J. Screening for problemdrinking among college freshman. J Adolesc Health1994;15:303-10.58. Werner M, Walker L, Greene J. Longitudinal evaluation of ascreening measure for problem drinking among female collegefreshmen. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 1994;148:1331-7.59. Werner M, Adger H, Jr. Early identification, screening, andbrief intervention for adolescent alcohol use. Arch Pediatr AdolescMed 1995;149:1241-8.60. Dawson D, Archer L. Relative frequency of heavy drinkingand the risk of alcohol dependence. Addiction 1993;88:1209-18.61. Willenbring M, Christensen K, Spring W, Jr., Rasmussen R.Alcoholism screening in the elderly. J Am Geriatr Soc1987;35:864-9.62. Bercsi S, Brickner P, Saha D. Alcohol use and abuse in thefrail, homebound elderly: a clinical analysis of 103 persons. DrugAlcohol Depend 1993;33:139-49.63. Fulop G, Reinhardt J, Strain J, Paris B, Miller M, FillitH. Identification of alcoholism and depression in a geriatricmedicine outpatient clinic. J Am Geriatr Soc 1993;41:737-41.64. Fink A, Hays RD, Moore AA, Beck JC. Alcohol-relatedproblems in older persons: determinants, consequences, andscreening. Arch Intern Med 1996; 156:1150-6.65. Brooker C, Peters J, McCabe C, Short N. The views of nursesto the conduct of a randomised controlled trial of problem drinkersin an accident and emergency department. Int J Nurs Stud1999;36:33-9.66. Peters J, Brooker C, McCabe C, Short N. Problemsencountered with opportunistic screening for alcohol-relatedproblems in patients attending an accident and emergencydepartment. Addiction 1998;93:589-94.67. Williams J, Chinnis A, Gutman D. Health promotion practicesof emergency physicians. Am J Emerg Med 2000;18:17-21.68. Burke T. The economic impact of alcohol abuse a