LEGAL SERVICES CORPORATIONSERVING THE CIVIL LEGAL NEEDS OF LOW-INCOME AMERICANSA SPECIAL REPORT to CONGRESSAPRIL 30, 2000I. SummaryLegal Services Corporation (LSC) is a private, non-membership,nonprofit corporation in the District of Columbia. The Board ofDirectors of LSC is composed of eleven voting members who areappointed by the President of the United States with the advice andconsent of the Senate. By law, the Board is bipartisan: no morethan six members can be of the same political party.LSC plays a central role in providing low-income Americans withaccess to legal assistance and information concerning criticalcivil legal problems. Created in 1974, LSC is charged by Congress"to provide equal access to the system of justice in our Nation forindividuals who seek redress of grievances" and "to provide highquality legal assistance to those who would otherwise be unable toafford adequate legal counsel."For 1999, LSC grantees reported closing 1,038,662 million1 civillegal cases relating to issues such as domestic violence, childcustody and visitation rights, evictions, access to health care,bankruptcy, unemployment and disability claims, and many otherissues that millions of low-income Americans face throughout theirlives. Without the funding provided by LSC, many of theseindividuals would have no other source of legal assistance forthese problems.II. The National Legal Services ProgramLegal Services Corporation funds local legal services programsto serve clients in every state, county, and congressional districtin the United States as well as in Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands,Guam and Micronesia. In addition, special service areas are fundedfor two populations with special needs - Native Americans andmigrant workers. Eligibility for services is determined on acase-by-case basis pursuant to grantee eligibility criteriaestablished under parameters set forth in LSC regulations. Eachgrantee establishes a maximum income eligibility level, not toexceed 125 percent of the current official Federal Poverty IncomeGuidelines.In 1996, Congress implemented a number of new accountabilityrequirements including competitive bidding for Legal ServicesCorporation grants. This system of competitive bidding eliminatedthe right of grantees to a hearing to contest a funding decisionawarding a grant to a competitor, ensuring LSC can award grants tothe best applicants without unnecessary administrative barriers.Additionally, new compliance monitoring procedures, which useoutside auditors to monitor grantee compliance with regulations andto perform comprehensive yearly oversight of grantee activities,were formulated. Another new provision adopted in 1997 prohibitsany local program that has been found to engage in a substantialviolation of the law or its grant conditions from being consideredfor an LSC grant in future competitions.Also in 1996, other new requirements were adopted governing whatlegal services programs can do and whom they can represent. Thesenew guidelines have refocused the LSC delivery system on servingindividual clients with particular legal needs. With the1 For a complete explanation of the number of cases closed for1999, see Section V, 1999 Case Statistics.implementation of these restrictions, legal services attorneysare not permitted to initiate or participate in class actionlawsuits. They may not challenge or engage in any activity toinfluence welfare reform. They may not collect court-awardedattorneys' fees. Litigation on behalf of prisoners andrepresentation of undocumented and other categories of aliens isalso prohibited. Other new requirements address redistricting,cases involving eviction from public housing of individuals chargedwith or convicted of drug violations and participation ingovernment rulemaking and solicitation. Unlike past lawsrestricting the work of legal services, these provisions apply toall the funds of a recipient, with very few specifiedexceptions.All local LSC-funded programs are administered by local boardsof directors (or other governing bodies, in certain instances), amajority of whose members are appointed by local bar associations,and provide legal assistance to individuals pursuant to locallydetermined priorities that respond to community conditions andneeds. Based on these priorities, local programs hire staff,contact local attorneys, and develop pro bono programs for thedirect delivery of legal assistance to eligible clients. LSCrequires each legal services program to spend an amount equal to atleast 12.5 percent of its annualized grant to encourageparticipation by private attorneys in the provision of legalassistance to poor individuals.The legal services delivery system offers a model of efficientresolution of disputes and avoidance of unnecessary litigation.Only a very small percentage (9% in 1999) of LSC-funded cases areresolved by the decision of a court, and the majority of these arefamily law cases that require a court determination.Rather than litigating cases, legal services lawyersconsistently find other, more efficient ways to solve problems fortheir clients. Under tremendous pressure from the demand for theirservices, they know they must use their limited resources wisely.As in past years, nearly threefourths of cases in 1999 wereresolved through advice, referral, or brief services.2% 20%III. The Case Statistics IssueLSC acknowledges that serious questions have been raisedconcerning the accuracy and validity of the Case Service Report(CSR) data submitted annually by our grantees.2 LSC is aware thatproblems exist in the statistical reports received and is takingsteps to identify and correct those problems. The problemsidentified stem, in part, from a lack of clarity in some of LSC'spast case reporting guidelines and, more generally, frominsufficient attention by grantees to the existing reporting anddocumentation requirements.It should be kept in mind that the issue is largely one ofgrantee compliance with technical and administrative guidance onhow and when to report certain activities. In no instance has LSC,its Inspector General, or the General Accounting Office identifiedany fraud or intentional misrepresentation by any of the granteesin their compilation and reporting of this data. LSC willaggressively take steps to correct problems associated with the CSRsystem, and will continue to make full and timely reports to theU.S. Congress and the public. LSC views the issues concerning theCSR data to be akin to those encountered by many governmententities as they attempt to meet the goals envisioned by theGovernment Performance and Results Act (GPRA).Self-initiated Review of CSR DataLSC's review of its CSR data was an outgrowth of its ongoingoversight responsibilities and it has become integral to itsvoluntary strategic planning process. Although not subject to theGovernment Performance and Results Act, LSC shares the aspirationsof that law to rationalize the budget and appropriations processesby tying funding into objective measures of the agency'sperformance.In November 1997, the LSC Board adopted its first Strategic Planfor FY 1998-2003. The strategic directions adopted by the Boardwill achieve LSC's vision3 by accomplishing two major strategicgoals: (1) By 2004, LSC will dramatically increase the provision oflegal services to eligible persons; (2) By 2004, LSC will ensurethat eligible clients are receiving appropriate and high qualitylegal assistance. That plan is currently being revised - as arethe2 "The conferees have concerns about the case service reportingand associated data reports submitted annually by the Corporation'sgrantees and the case statistical reports submitted by theCorporation to the Congress, and the conferees direct theCorporation to make improvement of the accuracy of thesesubmissions a top priority, per directions in the House report. Theconferees also direct the Corporation to submit its 1999 annualcase service reports and associated data reports to Congress nolater than April 30, 2000." Departments of Commerce, Justice, andState, the Judiciary, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act of2000, Pub. L. No. 106-113, 112 Stat. 1501.3 Twenty-five years ago, our government made a pledge to helpensure that all persons have access to America's civil justicesystem by enacting legislation that created Legal ServicesCorporation. Over the past quarter century, LSC has helped millionsof low-income citizens solve important, sometimes life-threatening,legal problems. Despite the success of LSC and its manycontributions to access to justice for low-income Americans, itsachievements are overshadowed by the fact that so many in oursociety continue to suffer injustice and are unable to gain accessto a lawyer for critical legal assistance. Until all members of oursociety are afforded that access, this promise of our governmentwill continue to be unfulfilled. LSC is committed to promoting anew vision of legal services that will achieve the goal of bringinglegal services to those currently denied access to the justicesystem.initial plans submitted by many governmental entities. Asrecently reported by GAO, most federal agencies are far frommeeting the goals set by GPRA for performance data on which theAdministration and Congress can rely on in setting budget amountsand appropriations levels.Nonetheless, LSC, having embarked on the path laid out by GPRA,recognizes the need to assess the data currently available ongrantee activity for its accuracy and adequacy as a measure ofLSC's performance. When the first Strategic Plan was published, andadopted clients served as a performance measure, the LSC InspectorGeneral decided there was a need to determine the accuracy of thegrantees' reports on which the measure was based. A series ofaudits of 1997 data was conducted in 1998 in anticipation of thefirst performance report due in 2000. These audits examined theaccuracy of case statistical reports submitted by six grantees, andthe causes of identified deficiencies, rather than validating ortesting the accuracy of national or system-wide data.Initial FindingsWhat LSC found when it began the assessment of the CSR systemwas a 20-year-old reporting structure, the guidance for which hadnot been updated since 1993. The reporting system rested on thedefinition of a "case." However clear and meaningful the definitionof a case may have been in the past, it became evident thedefinition had not kept pace with the changes in the servicedelivery systems. As the pace of the evolution of service deliverysystems and the reconfiguration of grantees accelerated followingthe funding cutbacks and program reforms in 1996, and spurred on bythe technological revolution, the reporting of grantee activitysolely on the basis of "cases" was becoming increasinglyinadequate. This resulted in inconsistent and inaccurate reporting.Critical legal services were now being provided, inter alia,through Internet web sites, through toll-free telephone intake andbrief advice systems, through pro se clinics and projects, andthrough stand-alone kiosks. An attorney representing a clientbefore judge and jury was no longer the norm of a "case" whendelivering critical legal services to low-income individuals.The audits conducted by the General Accounting Office (GAO) andreported in June 1999, confirmed the Inspector General's findingsas to the factors causing systemic errors in grantee casereporting. 4 The GAO visited five large programs: Puerto Rico LegalServices, Inc., Legal Services for New York City, Legal AidFoundation of Los Angeles, Legal Assistance Foundation of Chicago,and Legal Aid Bureau, Inc. in Baltimore, Maryland. Overall, the GAOdeemed questionable approximately 34 percent of both open andclosed cases reported by the five grantees in 1997. The percentageof questionable cases for individual programs ranged from 7 percentto 42 percent. A problem common to all programs was the untimelyclosure of cases, although again the extent of the problem in anyparticular program varied from under 4 percent in one program toover 30 percent in another. Overall, the GAO questioned between 5-9percent of the cases reported because of the lack of adequatefinancial eligibility documentation and between 7-24 percent of thecases for lack of citizenship or alien status documentation. Itshould4 GAO/GGD-99-135R LSC Case Reporting Problems.be noted that GAO concluded only that the case files failed tocontain the documentation necessary to confirm the eligibility orineligibility of any of these clients.LSC's Corrective ActionAs these concerns surfaced, LSC decided as an initial step toreissue the 1993 CSR Handbook in May 1998, providing additionalguidance on particular areas that were considered to be most proneto error. In general, clearer guidance was provided to programs onreviewing their own reporting procedures and practices, ensuringthey conformed to the Handbook and ensuring all branch offices wereaware of and were following these procedures. LSC reiteratedguidance on not reporting financially or otherwise ineligibleclients, referrals of ineligible cases or cases for which no legalwork was performed. Recognizing this guidance would not affect the1997 CSR data, which had already been submitted by the grantees,but wanting to improve the accuracy of future CSR data, LSC soughtto heighten the awareness of grantees to the CSR requirements andto focus their attention on potential problem areas. As previouslyreported to Congress, though, a number of grantees did voluntarilysubmit corrections to their 1997 CSR data during 1998.As the audit information became available during 1998 and into1999, LSC gained a fuller understanding of the extent of the CSRproblem and its complexities. Even though quantifiable data waslacking during most of 1998, LSC had sufficient information tobegin taking actions to address the problems. As previously noted,LSC reissued its CSR instructions to all grantees, callingattention to problem areas known at that time. Recognizing thatmore action was needed to improve the CSR system, LSC providedadditional written guidance to the field, including a substantialrevision to its CSR Handbook (reissued in November 1998), andconducted training sessions on that guidance. In addition, LSC hasrequired all grantees to perform a self-inspection of their CSRdata, has followed up on grantees where corrective action was foundnecessary, and has increased its on-site presence to test granteecompliance. 5IV. What Is A Case?A case is defined as the provision of permissible legalassistance to an eligible client with a legal problem, or set ofclosely related legal problems, accepted for assistance supportedby LSC or non-LSC funds in accordance with the requirements of theLSC Act, regulations, and other applicable law. 65 The FY2001 budget request includes $1.54 million in additionalfunds to provide 40 annual specialized on-site compliance reviews.These on-site reviews will allow LSC management to identify programweaknesses, engage in effective Corrective Actions Plans oversight,and provide program-specific needed guidance and oversight. Thereviews will allow LSC to more effectively execute its compliancefunction and ensure the accuracy of CSR reporting by itsgrantees.6 Legal Services programs may record and report the provision oflegal assistance as a case only if: (a) the client is financiallyand otherwise eligible to receive assistance under the LSC Act,regulations, and other applicable law; the client's case is withinprogram priorities (or is an emergency case accepted under theprogram's emergency case acceptance procedures); the legal servicesprogram has actually accepted the client for service through itsintake system or another established procedure for ensuring clienteligibility; (b) the type of legal assistance provided to theclient is not prohibited by the LSC Act, regulations, or otherapplicable law (e.g. a class action); (c) the legalSince 1997, LSC has significantly tightened its requirements forwhat constitutes a case. A case that is eligible to be counted assuch must include some actual counsel and advice or other legalassistance provided to the client. Thus, analysis and referral of acase to another legal services provider cannot be counted, nor canservice where the client is accepted and work is done, but theclient withdraws or loses contact with the program before anyactual legal assistance is provided.Programs have been required to screen their submissions for"duplicates." A duplicate is not merely the submission of exactlythe same case twice by computer or other error, but also anysituation in which the same client returns to the program with thesame legal problem in the same year. The test as to how similar theissue in two separate requests for assistance has to be before itis counted as one case has presented significant borderlineproblems, but there have been a large number of clear duplicateseliminated from the case reports.It has also been clarified that if a case fails to meet anyrequired documentation (financial eligibility, citizenship/eligiblealien status, within program priorities, etc.) it may not bereported to LSC as a case. Especially for 1999, LSC hassubstantially strengthened the documentation requirements forreporting a case to LSC. As a result, numerous cases have beenexcluded from reporting, even though the client received legalservice, because the case was not documented according to LSCrequirements. For many of these cases, it was overwhelmingly likelythat the client and the service would have been eligible to becounted as a closed case but for the lack of properdocumentation.Programs, however, are allowed to count closed cases for theelderly and for battered women under the following specificprograms without financial eligibility information because theseFederal programs require that clients be accepted regardless offinancial circumstances: Title XX Social Security Act, Titles IIIand IV Older Americans Act, and Violence Against Women Act.V. 1999 Case StatisticsFor 1999, LSC grantees reported closing 1,038,662 civil legalcases relating to issues such as domestic violence7, child custodyand visitation rights, evictions, access to health care,bankruptcy, unemployment and disability claims, and many otherissues faced by millions of low-income Americans. The consequencesof such problems may be as serious as the loss of a family's onlysource of income or homelessness. Left unresolved, they can costsociety far more than the expense of providing legal services toaddress them. Other case types frequently encountered includeforeclosures, collections and repossessions, child support, andwage claims. Without the federal funding provided by LSC to locallegal services programs, many, andproblem(s) of a client are not of a type prohibited by the LSCAct, regulations, or other applicable law (e.g., an abortioncase).7 In 1999, it is estimated that LSC grantees receivedapproximately $10.5 million in federal funds under the ViolenceAgainst Women Act (VAWA) for use in rendering assistance indomestic violence cases. It is estimated that in the year 2000 theywill receive approximately $11.5 million in VAWA funding.6Consumer1%possibly most, of these individuals with these problems wouldhave no other source of legal assistance.Despite LSC's significant efforts to improve the data accuracy,there may be occurrences of errors in documentation or substance inthis number. In January of this year, LSC instructed all programsto conduct a Self-Inspection of a sample of closed cases prior tosubmitting 1999 CSR data to LSC. The purpose of the Self-Inspectionprocess was to provide programs a means to verify, by reviewing asample of cases, that their 1999 CSR data satisfies LSC's standardsfor accuracy. In addition, it provides LSC management usefulinsight into the current nature and extent of the CSR dataissue.Although the Self-Inspection was not constructed, or executed,to yield a statistically valid assessment of the accuracy of theclosed cases for 1999, the Self-Inspection did reveal, LSCbelieves, significant improvements in data accuracy from previousyears. Again stressing this process did not produce an extensiveassessment, LSC management submits that it is sufficient toreasonably estimate the population of reported cases contains anerror rate of 11 percent.In order to fulfill our pledge to the U.S. Congress and to thegeneral public concerning our commitment to providing the mostaccurate and reliable data, we adjusted the number of casesreported by LSC grantees (1,038,662) by the average estimated errorrate (11%). Accordingly, we submit a total of cases closed for 1999of 924,000. For reasons that will be discussed in subsequentsections of this report, we also highlight that this figurerepresents only a portion of the work conducted by LSC grantees.Nonetheless, it represents the most reliable, albeit conservative8, estimate of cases closed in 1999 by LSC grantees.8 The adjusted total of 924,000 is conservative because: (a)some grantees did use Self-Inspection data to excludeLeveraging Federal ResourcesFederal funding to Legal Services Corporation provides thenational infrastructure for theU.S. civil legal services delivery system. But for the federalinvestment, the overwhelming majority of cases reported by LSCgrantees would not have been possible. In six states, the federalinvestment represents almost the entire contribution for providingcivil legal services to low-income individuals.9 In another sixteenstates, LSC funding represents over 50% of the total investment inthe civil legal services system.10Beginning with 1999 cases, another significant change is therequirement for programs to report all cases eligible for LSCservices, regardless of the funding source. The prior rule mandatedthat each case had to be at least partially funded by LSC funds, aswell as being LSCeligible. This new change is intended to make casereporting more consistent among grantee programs as these programshave varying mixes of LSC and non-LSC funding and varying,legitimate methods of allocating LSC and non-LSC funding amongtheir activities that produce case closures.As noted above, the LSC case count for 1999 includes all casesthat meet LSC eligibility criteria, regardless of the funding mixof any particular grantee. LSC strongly encourages all its granteesto obtain other funding for the client community that Congress haslegislated is eligible for LSC funding. The ability to leverageother funds to represent LSC eligible clients is a factor LSCconsiders in evaluating its grantees. LSC believes that the totalnumber of LSC eligible clients served by LSC grantees is ofconsiderable relevance.It has been suggested that this change may cause an artificialincrease in the number of cases reported through the CSR system.The purpose of the change, however, was to achieve better accuracyand more consistency in the reporting of work made possible by LSCfunding. Our grantees have successfully leveraged their federalfunding by attracting other private and public sources of funding.Grantees use their mix of funding in a variety of ways. The formerCSR system did not consistently collect and identify much of thiseffort on behalf of eligible clients. In fact, because of thisinconsistency in reporting, the old system often producedartificial variations in reported case statistics among similarprograms. The revised reporting requirement will greatly enhancethe accuracy of the data on services to the eligible U.S. lowincomepopulation and will produce more complete data on the work ofgrantees that can be reasonably attributable to LSC grantees.from their submission to LSC approximately 17,000 of theinsufficiently supported cases that made up the 11 percent errorrate, and (b) in the process of requiring more rigorousdocumentation of cases, some cases that actually had sufficientdocumentation, and many cases where the client was almost certainlyeligible, were excluded, resulting in a countervailingundercount.9 State-wide civil legal services' percentages of total fundingreceived from LSC: Alabama, 91%; Arkansas, 80%; Mississippi, 95%;New Mexico, 83%; South Dakota, 89%; Wyoming, 84%. The SPAN Update:A Guide to Legal Services Planning. January 1999. American BarAssociation: National Legal Aid & Defender Association.10 Arizona, Iowa, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Louisiana,Montana, North Carolina, North Dakota, Nebraska, Oklahoma, SouthCarolina, Texas, Wisconsin, and West Virginia. The SPAN Update: AGuide to Legal Services Planning. January 1999. American BarAssociation: National Legal Aid & Defender Association.FUNDING FOR LSC GRANTEES -- 1999Developing New Performance MeasuresIn addition to providing Congress and the public more reliableand accurate statistics on closed cases, LSC is committed todeveloping and to implementing by January 1, 2001, a new reportingsystem to document and assess the work of LSC grantees. LSC hascontracted with an independent research firm to develop andimplement a pilot project at six LSC grantees that will gather thenecessary information needed to create a reporting system thatcaptures all the work of LSC grantees, not simply the traditional"closed cases." This reporting system will detail and describe thedelivery of services that are not cases, services such as communityeducation, information through Internet web sites, self-help formsand kiosks. The reporting system may also provide information onthe impact to the community and to the client by describingnon-"case" services' in the following manner: the type of innovative service provided,  the number ofeligible clients receiving the service,  the nature of the legalproblems addressed through the innovative service, and  the impactof the innovative service on the legal problems.LSC also will develop systems for measuring the outcomes (orbenefits) of the assistance that the programs provide to eligibleclients. Outcome measurement may include an assessment of: the monetary impact of employment and benefits cases,  theeffect on quality of life of health and housing cases,  the impacton minor children of assistance in family cases, and  thefinancial stability afforded in consumer/finance cases.In addition to establishing a more complete reporting system,LSC is committed to using economic analysis and performancemeasures to evaluate the impact of federal funding and individualgrantee performance. Discussed below are two methods of analysiscurrently under review to accomplish these goals. While LSC willimplement these performance measures on January 1, 2001, it willdiligently evaluate the chosen method of analysis prior toimplementation to ensure it provides useful and meaningful data. By2001, LSC will require grantees to provide information that allowsLSC to comparatively analyze the cost per case among similarlysituated programs and similar types of services, i.e., brief adviceand referral. LSC statistics for CY 2002 will reflect the input ofall these performance measures.The "Cost per Case" Model: The first methodology LSC isdeveloping and evaluating to assess the work of grantees is a"cost-per-case" analysis. "Cost per case" is a rough quantitativeoutput measure of the efficiency of LSC programs' delivery of caseservices to eligible clients. In the past, it has been computed bydividing a program's annual LSC funding by its annual total casesclosed. The calculation uses all of a program's LSC funding, eventhough LSC programs provide services to eligible clients that donot meet the definition of a "closed case," as previously detailed.While a "cost-per-case" analysis is limited in that it onlyaddresses quantity, and not quality of services, it does providesome useful quantitative information. The raw cost per case figurecan be further analyzed to take into account the level of service(from brief advice and counsel up to a court case).Currently, LSC uses a "cost-per-case" analysis when it conductson-site evaluations of grantees. By comparing the "cost per case"of a particular grantee over a period of time, LSC may gain usefulinformation on the workload and performance of a program from yearto year. LSC also uses a "cost-per-case" analysis to comparesimilarly situated grantees. This measure does require LSC staff tounderstand how services differ from grantee to grantee, so that thedifferences in levels of service can be adjusted to arrive atmeaningful cost-per-case figures.For example, grantee A receives $30,000 in LSC funds and serves3,000 clients at a cost-per-case ratio of $100. The majority ofthese cases involve the provision of advice and brief service,traditionally not very time-consuming or labor intensive. Grantee Balso receives $30,000 in LSC funds, but only serves 500 clients ata cost-per case ratio of $600. However, grantee B primarily handlesclients facing domestic violence, eviction from their residences,or issues involving access to health care. Grantee B's casesusually involve protracted negotiation or litigation. Given thedifferences in the types of cases handled by these two grantees, asimple cost-per-case analysis, without further definition, wouldyield meaningless data in terms of the comparative value ofservices provide by these two programs.Another caution that must be raised with this particularapproach is that all LSC-funded programs engage in a wide range ofvery important activities that do not fall within the definition of"case," which would thus not be included in valuing the program'sservices. LSC-funded programs use many means (newsletters,pamphlets, speaking engagements, and web sites) to provide legalinformation to low-income persons, helping them avoid legalproblems or aiding them in learning to handle problems when theysurface. Where appropriate, LSC grantees refer low-income personsto organizations that can help the clients with their problems -either to alternate sources of legal assistance or to other sourcesof assistance, such as charitable organizations and social servicesagencies. Through the provision of legal information, programs alsoassist individuals in preparing to represent themselves in court.Resources expended in supporting efforts such as community legaleducation, outreach, state planning and resource development alsowould not be factored into the program's "cost-per-case."LSC is carefully studying how to refine the "cost-per-case"analysis in order to use it effectively as a management tool.Toward this end, LSC has recently initiated activities to developmore appropriate strategies and mechanisms to gather and toquantify data on all of the work -- cases and matters, regardlessof funding source -- being performed by its grantees.The Cases Funded Exclusively with LSC Resources Model: Thesecond methodology LSC is developing is a model to estimate thenumber of cases funded exclusively with LSC funds. To arrive atthis estimate, total cases reported by LSC grantees would beaugmented with an estimate of all cases handled by LSC-fundedorganizations. These are cases traditionally not reported to LSC -either because documentation LSC requires is not present in thesecases or because they are expressly handled with funding thatallows financial eligibility standards that are more lax than LSCstandards. This number would then be added to the total reported toLSC (to produce a total caseload number) and then reduced by thenational rate of funding of LSC programs by other sources.This process would yield an estimate for cases that are fundedexclusively with LSC resources. In using such a number, however,several factors need to be kept in mind.This figure would only be an estimate. We do not compilean actual count of the number of cases that are not within LSC'sdefinition of a case.The reportable and not reportable cases, on average, donot take the same amount of time. Other funding sources may befunding a different mix of cases that may, on average, take more orless time than the average case for LSC-eligibleclients.LSC will receive additional information on the ability ofgrantees to leverage federal dollars using an estimate of casesfunded exclusively with federal resources, through thismethodology, although it is a less than perfect method of analysis.LSC routinely evaluates its grantees on their ability to leverageadditional dollars from alternative sources to expand their abilityto provide critical legal services to low-income persons. Forexample, as noted above, grantees often seek alternative funding toexpand services to women and children in potentially abusivesituations. Further, under its state planning initiative thatmandates all grantees within a particular state work together tocreate a comprehensive and integrated statewide delivery system,grantees are required to address how they will work together toexpand the resources available within that state to support legalservices.VI. The Need for Legal ServicesThe need for legal services is overwhelming. Although we live ina time of great economic prosperity, there are currently still 34.5million Americans living in households with an income below thepoverty level.11 Some 10 million additional individuals withincomes between 100 and 125 percent of the poverty level are alsopotentially eligible for legal services. This means that almost oneout of every five Americans is eligible for legal servicesassistance. America's children are particularly affected bypoverty. Even though the poverty rate has slightly declined, 18.9percent of children are still poor.12 In order to ensure theseAmericans are not left out of the justice system, a strong federalrole in supporting legal services is vital.A 1994 study for the American Bar Association concluded thatapproximately 80 percent of poor Americans do not have theadvantage of an attorney when they are faced with serious situationwhere a lawyer's advice and assistance would make a difference.Similar conclusions have been reached by state legal needs' studiesin a dozen states including Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,Indiana, Kentucky, Maryland, Massachusetts, Missouri, Nevada, NewYork, and Virginia, using a variety of methodologies for estimatingthe unmet legal needs of the poor.11 U.S. Census Bureau, Poverty in the United States: 1998,http://www.census.gov/prod/99pubs/p60-207.pdf12 Center for Budget and Policy Priorities, Analysis of 1998Poverty and Income Data, (September 1999).Estimated Unmet Legal NeedEligible Clients unable to attain needed legal assistanceEligible Clients served by LSC Programs-- 20%Because of limited resources, local legal services programs areforced to turn away tens of thousands of people with critical legalproblems. A survey of selected programs in the spring of 1993, whenLSC funding was substantially higher than it is today, revealedthat nearly half of all people who applied for assistance fromlocal programs were turned away because of a lack of programresources. Most programs are forced to limit the cases they acceptto emergencies or other situations that threaten the safety andstability of the family or individual involved. Recent studiesestimate that between one and four million American womenexperience an assault by an intimate partner each year, and 3.3million children are exposed to violence by family members againsttheir mothers or female caretakers. 13Client DemographicsLegal services clients are as diverse as our nation,encompassing all races, ethnic groups and ages. They include theworking poor, veterans, family farmers, people with disabilities,and victims of natural disasters. Many were formerly middle class,and became poor because of age, unemployment, illness, or thebreakup of a family.In 1999, as in the past, nearly three-fourths of LSC clientswere women, most of them mothers with children. Although the namedclient is usually an adult, most LSC cases also involve and benefitchildren. The legal problems faced by people living in poverty canresult in particularly serious, long-term consequences forchildren.13 According to an August 1995 Bureau of Justice StatisticsSpecial Report, Violence Against Women: Estimates from theRedesigned Survey (NCJ-154348) and a report by the AmericanPsychological Association, Violence and the Family: Report of theAmerican Psychological Association Presidential Task Force onViolence and the Family(1996).Elderly people often require legal assistance because of theirspecial health, income and social needs, especially in coping withthe government administered benefits on which many depend forincome and health care.EthnicityWhite -- Not of Hispanic Origin 38%Black -- Not of Hispanic Origin 27%AgeUnder 1860 & Over2%18-59 85%Gender73.6%VII. ConclusionEstablished by Congress in 1974, LSC plays a central role inproviding low-income Americans with access to legal assistance andinformation critical to resolving their civil legal problems. In1999, for example, LSC grantees reported closing 1,038,662 civillegal cases relating to issues such as domestic violence, childcustody and visitation rights, evictions, access to health care,bankruptcy, unemployment and disability claims, and many otherissues faced by millions of low-income Americans. Despite LSC'ssignificant efforts to improve data accuracy, there may beoccurrences of errors in documentation or substance.In order to fulfill our pledge to the U.S. Congress and to thegeneral public concerning our commitment to providing the mostaccurate and reliable data, we adjusted the number of casesreported by LSC grantees (1,038,662) by the average estimated errorrate (11%). Accordingly, we submit a total of cases closed for 1999of 924,000. This number represents the most reliable, albeitconservative, estimate of cases closed in 1999 by LSC grantees.Recognizing that valid questions have been raised regarding theaccuracy and validity of the Case Service Reports (CSR) data thatLSC's grantees annually submit, LSC has committed itself toensuring that reliable data is provided.14 The decrease in thenumber of closed cases for 1999 is, in large measure, the result ofLSC's new, more stringent reporting guidelines. For example, it hasbeen clarified that if a case file fails to contain any requireddocumentation14 The Subcommittee on Commercial and Administrative Law held anoversight hearing on Legal Services Corporation September 29, 1999.The hearing heightened awareness of some of the problems LSC wasencountering in attempting to provide accurate statistics relatingto services provided by LSC grantees. Subcommittee Chairman Rep.Gekas and Rep. Chabot informed LSC of their expectation that thestatistics provided by LSC to Congress concerning their grantees'activities be accurate. For example, Mr. Chabot stated "Congresscertainly does look at the statistics that we are provided, and weexpect those statistics to be accurate when we are determining whatprograms are going to be funded and at what levels, so we expectthose numbers to be accurate, and when they're not it disturbs us agreat deal, as it should." Legal Services Corporation: Oversighthearing before the Subcomm. on Commercial and Admin. Law of theHouse Comm. on the Judiciary. 106th Cong., 1st Sess. (1999).(financial eligibility, citizenship/eligible alien status,within program priorities, etc.) it may not be reported to LSC as acase. As a result, numerous cases have been excluded fromreporting, even though the client received legal service, becausethe case lacked the required documentation.Unfortunately, the civil legal needs of all low-income Americansare not being adequately met due to severe funding shortages at thefederal and state level. In FY95, Congress appropriated $402.5million for grants to local legal services programs. Assuminginflation remains at current rates through 2001, almost $450million is required in FY01 to maintain the purchasing power (andservices) of the FY95 level. Unless the federal investment forcivil legal services is substantially increased, a large segment ofthe U.S. population will continue to be without access to thejustice system. LSC's Budget Request for FY01 includes a modestincrease of $24 million for grants to local programs.LSC is committed to continuing to improve the accuracy of itscase statistics, vigorously enforcing the Congressionalrestrictions enacted in 1996, and creating new and more meaningfulways to evaluate the work of legal services programs receivingfederal funds. We call on Congress, the private bar, and local andstate governments to support LSC in fulfilling its Congressionalmandate to provide low-income individuals throughout America withreal, meaningful access to our nation's justice system.