Legal Services CorporationA Special Report to CongressSTATE PLANNING & RECONFIGURATIONSeptember 2001BOARD OF DIRECTORSMANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATIONOFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERALDouglas S. Eakeley, Chair LaVeeda Morgan Battle, Vice ChairHulett H. Askew John T. Broderick, Jr. John N. Erlenborn EdnaFairbanks-WilliamsF. Wm. McCalpinMaria Luisa Mercado Nancy H. Rogers Thomas F.Smegal, Jr. Ernestine P. WatlingtonJohn N. Erlenborn, President Victor M. Fortuno, Vice Presidentfor Legal Affairs, General Counsel, and Corporate SecretaryMauricio Vivero, Vice President for Governmental Relationsand Public Affairs Randi Youells, Vice President for ProgramsDavid L. Richardson, Acting Vice President for AdministrationDanilo A. Cardona, Director of Compliance and Enforcement AliceDickerson, Director of Human Resources Michael A. Genz, Director ofProgram Performance John C. Meyer, Acting Director of InformationManagement Leslie Q. Russell, Director of InformationTechnologyLeonard J. Koczur, Acting Inspector General David C. Maddox,Director of Financial and Information Resource Management LaurieTarantowicz, Assistant Inspector General for Legal ReviewI.INTRODUCTIONLegal Services Corporation (LSC) is a private, non-membership,nonprofit corporation in the District of Columbia. Eleven votingmembers, appointed by the President of the United States with theadvice and consent of the Senate, compose the LSC Board ofDirectors. By law, the Board is bipartisan: no more than sixmembers can be of the same political party.1LSC was created by Congress in 1974 and continues to play acentral role in providing low-income Americans with access to legalassistance and information concerning critical civil legalproblems. LSC isguided by its congressionally mandated mission, spelledout in the LSC Act of 1974, "to provide equal access tothe system of justice in our Nation for individuals whoseek redress of grievances" and "to provide high qualitylegal assistance to those who would otherwise be unableto afford adequate legal counsel."2LSC funds local legal services programs to servediverse clientele in every state, county, and congressionaldistrict in the United States, as well as in Puerto Rico,the Virgin Islands, Guam, and Micronesia. As one of the primaryfunders of civil equal justice in every state, LSC has a duty tostimulate the most effective means of delivering legal services tolow-in-come individuals. LSC is committed to meaningfulpartnerships with our grantees and the broader civil equal justicecommunity. LSC is also obligated to ensure that the federalinvestment promotes efficient and effective client service andcomplements the efforts of other providers of civil legalservices.In 1996, Congress passed a major overhaul of LSC's grant-makingand regulatory structure that included three major reformsimpacting the legal services community.3 First, Congress adopted anumber of new accountability requirements governing what servicesLSC-funded programs may provide, what they may do with non-LSCfunds, and whom they may represent. These new guidelines haverefocused the LSC delivery system on serving individual clientswith particular legal needs. Attorneys working for LSC-fundedprograms may no longer, for example, initiate or participate inclass action lawsuits, collect courtawarded attorneys' fees,represent prisoners or certain categories of aliens, or take casesinvolving political redistricting, abortion, or drug-related publichousing evictions.4 Another major reform of 1996 instituted acompetitive bidding process for LSC service contracts, requiringprograms to demonstrate results and progress as a condition ofcontinued federal funding.5 Finally, in 1996 Congress approved aone-third reduction in LSC's annual appropriation, from $400million to $278 million.6In July 1995, in anticipation of the funding cutbacks, LSCinitiated the broad outlines of its "state planning process" tohighlight strategies by which programs could stretch scarce federaldollars to help ensure that all low-income clients have an equalopportunity to receive the most accessible, effective legalassistance possible. After three years of development in the field,LSC's State Planning Initiative was formally launched in 1998. Inthe ensuingLSC Annual Appropriation19851986198719881989199019911992199319941995199619971998199920002001Fiscal YearII. LSC CONVENES RECONFIGURATION TASK FORCEThis document, the LSC Special Report to Congress - StatePlanning and Reconfiguration, was prepared in response to a requestmade by the U.S. House of Representatives during the FY2002Appropriations process, in which the House AppropriationsSubcommittee on Commerce, Justice, State, and the Judiciarystated:The Committee supports LSC's efforts to streamline its servicearea configurations through the State planning process. However,the Committee has been made aware of concerns that LSC hasattempted to impose its own reconfiguration plans on certain Stateswithout clearly articulating standards for such decisions. Inseveral instances the Corporation rejected reconfiguration plansdeveloped and approved by all relevant stakeholders within a State,and provided no opportunity for the State to appeal that decision.The Committee expects LSC to review the State planning process andthe concerns raised, and report back to the Committee by no laterthan September 4, 200110, with a proposal that articulates thereconfiguration standards and process for States to appeal LSC'sdecisions. The Committee intends that LSC consult with appropriatestakeholders in developing this proposal.11Since implementation of the State Planning Initiative in 1998,LSC has sought to apply a set of detailed criteria in making alldecisions on whether a given service area arrangement is optimallyconfigured to provide high-quality legal services to the greatestnumber of eligible low-income clients. These criteria were createdto complement the goals of State Planning and to guide staff inevaluating the efficacy of service area plans submitted byrecognized stakeholders in each state. These guidelines wereconveyed to LSC-funded programs through the release of a series ofProgram Letters and other field correspondences.12 Furthermore, asof July 19, 2001, all recognized stakeholders have a right to a denovo review of service area decisions by both the LSC VicePresident for Programs and the LSC President when LSC decisions runcontrary to stakeholders' proposed configuration schemes.13In response to inquiries from the legal services community andMembers of Congress, the LSC Board of Directors on June 30, 2001,established the LSC Task Force to Study and Report on Configurationof Service Areas. The Task Force was charged with reviewing"existing policies, standards, and procedures governing stateplanning and for defining service areas; and any revisions toexisting policies, standards, and procedures which the Task Forceconcludes to warrant serious consideration by LSC."14Co-chaired by two LSC Board members, New Hampshire Supreme CourtJustice John T. Broderick and Ernestine Watlington, the Task Forceconvened the first of several meetings on August 21, 2001, inWashington, D.C. Representing the Task Force were Hulett H. Askewand Maria Luisa Mercado of the LSC Board; James Head of theNational Legal Aid & Defender Association; MelvilleD. Miller, Jr., of Legal Services of New Jersey; Jonathan Rossofthe American Bar Association's Standing Committee on Legal Aidand Indigent Defendants; Faith Rivers of the South Carolina BarAssociation; and Jeanne Charn, director of Clinical Legal Educationat Harvard Law School.Justice Broderick delivered an interim report from the TaskForce to the LSC Board of Directors at the Board's meeting onSeptember 8, 2001, in Alexandria, Va. Broderick reported that theTask Force has made considerable progress in examining concernspertinent to service area configuration and the right of designatedstakeholders to appeal decisions with which they disagree. Hestated that broad consensus exists on a majority of issues beforethe Task Force and that remaining areas of disagreement areexpected to be resolved in short order. One specific area ofconsensus among Task Force members was that all LSC reconfigurationcriteria should be codified into one document. The current LSCreconfiguration standards, which are under review by the TaskForce, are compiled and discussed in Section IV of this SpecialReport to Congress.A final report from the Task Force is expected to be presentedto the LSC Board of Directors for consideration in October 2001.The LSC Board will give due consideration to any and allrecommendations embodied in the Task Force's final report. In theinterim, the Board believes it crucial to relay to Congress LSC'scurrent standards governing state planning, service areaconfiguration, and review processes.In this report, the LSC Board of Directors is pleased to provideinformation addressing Congress's three principal concerns:1 . A Review of the State Planning Process;2.A Report on LSC's Reconfiguration Standards;and3.The Process to Appeal LSC's ReconfigurationDecisions.III. AN OVERVIEW OF THE STATE PLANNING PROCESSLSC's State Planning Initiativeembraces a new vision15 for legal services in which eligibleclients in every state would be afforded an equal opportunity toavail themselves of high-quality civil legal assistance. In aneffort to foster more consistent levels of statewide service and to eliminate "service gaps" that leave clients in geographically remote areas under-represented compared to their urban counterparts, LSC has asked its grantees to undergo a fundamental paradigm shift in their program visions. Program leaders have been instructed to abandon the parochial thinking of "What's best for clients in myservice area?" and asked instead to consider "What's bestfor clients throughout my state?"LSC initially stressed the importance of state planning in 1995 when it asked its recipients in each state toparticipate in the development of plans for the design, configuration, and operation of LSC-funded programs in theirstates. The 1995 Program Letters16 containing this directivealso enumerated the issues and criteria that state planningshould address.Launching the State Planning Initiative, LSCstaff developed and issued Program Letters 1998-117 and 199818which directed programs to plan for the creation of comprehensive,integrated, client-centered legal services systems and defined theterms of such systems. Grantees were required to submit reportsoutlining their state plans by October 1, 1998. Their plans were toinclude responses to the seven central tenets of State Planning:(1) development of intake, advice, and referral services; (2)effective usage of technology; (3) increased access to legalself-help and prevention information; (4) coordination of legalwork, training, information, and expert assistance; (5) engagement of pro bono attorneys; (6)development of additional state, local, and private resources; and(7) optimal configuration of service areas.In designing state plans, LSC instructed its programs tocollaborate with a range of local, state, and nationalstakeholders, including state and local bar associations, InterestOn Lawyers Trust Account (IOLTA) administrators, state judiciaries,client groups, pro bono commissions, state legislatures,non-LSC-funded legal services programs, and a host of others. LSCrequires its grantees in each state to work with each other andequal justice stakeholders to develop justice communities that bestrespond to clients' most compelling needs, ensure the moststrategic and cost-effective use of all available resources, andmaximize the opportunity for clients statewide to receive timely,effective, and appropriate legal services.Guided by the belief that access to quality legal services iscritical to a fair adversarial justice system and committed tomaking significant improvements in their delivery, the LSC Board ofDirectors approved and enacted Strategic Directions 2000-2005 inJanuary 2000. Its twin objectives are to dramatically increase thenumber of low-income Americans who can access the civil justicesystem and to ensure that all clients receive quality legalservices.IV. REPORT ON LSC'S RECONFIGURATION STANDARDSCongress has vested in Legal Services Corporation theresponsibility of specifying the service areas for which it willoffer grants for the provision of legal services. LSC awards oneservice contract per delineated service area. Some states, likeCalifornia and New Jersey, comprise multiple service areas and,therefore, feature multiple LSC-funded grantees. Others, likeIndiana and Colorado, have one service area encompassing the entirestate and one corresponding statewide program.Each state is different, and in some states, intra-state regionsdiffer significantly as well. As LSC has stated in numerous lettersto the field, there is no "magic number" of legal services programsfor a given state or a single delivery model that fits every state.Each state plan must be viewed based on the totality of thecircumstances, with the bottom-line consideration turning on LSC'sstudied determination as to whether a given service areaconfiguration inures to the benefit of the greatest number ofclients in the most cost-effective way.As a general rule, service area configuration decisions areevaluated against one overarching principle: Program configurationshould occur in a manner that maximizes the effective and efficientdelivery of high quality legal services to eligible clientsthroughout the state within a comprehensive, integrated deliverysystem. In some states, it may be possible to develop and implementstatewide initiatives to improve service delivery, increaseresources, and enhance the capacity of the system to meet the civillegal needs of all low-income people without altering service areasor historical relationships. In other states, the very developmentand implementation of such initiatives may require overhauling orestablishing new organizational relationships and serviceareas.In the vast majority of cases, LSC has agreed with therecommendations of state planning groups throughout the country andhas configured service areas accordingly. However, LSC, in theproper exercise of its statutory authority, may sometimes reject astate plan as insufficiently responsive to the tenets of StatePlanning and substitute a reconfiguration plan adjudged to bettermaximize effective and efficient delivery of high quality legalservices.In deciding to accept or reject a proposed state plan, LSC mustultimately determine whether, when taken together with strategiesoutlined in the plan in question, the proposed configuration isbest calibrated to:Until the implementation of the State Planning Initiative,determining service areas in a given state was more a product ofgeographic and historical happenstance than a reasoned judgmentabout the precise configuration that would yield the best legalservices system for the greatest number of clients. But Congress'1996 reform replacing presumptive refunding of grantees withcompetitive bidding for LSC service contracts19- coupled with budget cuts of the same year - necessitated athoroughreexamination of the efficacy of existing service areaarrangements in each state. With fewer resources to expend and agrowing client base to serve, LSC has embraced service areareconfiguration as one important way to "insure that grants andcontracts are made so as to provide the most economical andeffective delivery of legal assistance to persons in both urban andrural areas."20 Rather than viewing service area reconfiguration asa punitive measure against under-performing programs currentlyreceiving federal funds, LSC instead considers statewidereconfiguration to be one of several tools to ensure that federaldollars are being spent in the most efficient, cost-effectivemanner possible, in a way that will result in the best service tothe most low-income clients.11V. RECONFIGURATION REVIEW PROCESSOn July 19, 2001, LSC implemented a Reconfiguration Review Process establishing an official framework by whichdesignated state planning bodies21 may seek review of LSCreconfiguration decisions. This formal Review Process guaranteesrepresentatives of every designated state planning body the rightto direct communication with LSC officials at the highest level inseeking reconsideration of an LSC decision. The objective of theReview Process is to maximize the potential for full communicationbetween stakeholders and LSC officials before any configurationdecisions are made final and effective.Central to the Review Process is the right of designatedstakeholders to de novo reviews of all configuration decisions,first by the LSC Vice President for Programs and then by the LSCPresident, whose decision is final and binding. The Review Processguarantees DSPB representatives a face-to-face meeting with theVice President of Programs to make their case. If the stateplanning body disagrees with the Vice President's decision, theymay then request a face-to-face meeting with the LSC President toseek reconsideration of the Vice President's recommendation. Afterdue consideration of the stakeholders' ultimate appeal, the LSCPresident will promptly advise the state planning body of a finaldecision on configuration.LSC is committed to effective communication and coordinationwith designated state planning bodies (DSPB) on matters in whichdecisions are likely to have a direct impact on other civil equaljustice planning initiatives in a state. LSC recognizes theincreasingly active role that state planners have assumed inoverseeing state civil equal justice delivery activities. LSCfurther recognizes that its decisions have the potential todirectly affect state funding, resource allocation, and otherconsiderations. In recognition of this crucial symbiosis, LSC'sReconfiguration Review Process prescribes a clear review mechanismthat guarantees recognized stakeholders a full opportunity to maketheir case:1) At the earliest possible time, LSC's state planning team willadvise the DSPB in each state of any issues of concern with respectto service area configuration and provide guidance on how toaddress those concerns consistent with the enumeratedreconfiguration standards.2) To the extent reasonably practical, LSC's state planning teamwill work with the DSPB, grantees, and other stakeholders to fostertimely and effective consideration of issues relating to servicearea reconfiguration.3) LSC will identify in which states, if any, it proposes todefine new service areas at least sixty (60) days prior topublishing those service areas in the Federal Register. At thattime, LSC also will notify the relevant state planning bodies ofpending service area changes.4) If the LSC state planning team recommends a service areaconfiguration that differs from that proposed by the DSPB,authorized representatives of the DSPB may seek a meeting withLSC's Vice President for Programs to ask for reconsideration. Therepresentatives will be asked to articulate in writing theirconcerns and objections.5) Upon such a request, the VP for Programs will convene aface-to-face meeting with the authorized representatives of theDSPB. As soon as practical thereafter, the VP for Programs shalladvise the DSPB of the service area configuration recommendation tobe forwarded to the LSC President. In making the recommendation,the VP for Programs shall be guided by state planners'responsiveness to the enumerated reconfiguration standards; theanalysis and recommendations of the LSC state planning team; thearticulated concerns of the DSPB; and any other information deemedto be relevant by the VP of Programs.6) If the DSPB is not satisfied with the VP for Programs'recommendation, it may seek a meeting with the LSC President to askfor reconsideration. The DSPB will be asked to provide anyadditional written information it wishes to be considered to assistthe LSC President in fully and fairly entertaining all concerns andobjections.7) Upon such a request, the President will convene aface-to-face meeting with the authorized representatives of theDSPB. As soon as practical thereafter, the LSC President willadvise the DSPB of the final decision on service area configurationin the affected state or territory. In making the decision, thePresident shall be guided by state planners' responsiveness toenumerated reconfiguration standards; the analyses andrecommendations of the LSC state planning team and the VP forPrograms; the articulated concerns of the DSPB; and any otherinformation deemed relevant by the President.VI. CONCLUSIONCongressional reforms passed in 1996 necessitated a fundamentalshift in how LSC apportions federal dollars to legal servicesproviders across the country. The shift to a competitive biddingprocess, coupled with sizeable reductions in Legal ServicesCorporation's annual budget, compelled the LSC Board of Directorsto adopt a new approach to allocating Congress' annual investmentin civil equal justice for the poor. The expectations underlyingthis new approach have been spelled out in considerable detail inProgram Letters issued broadly to the field, and in state-by-statecorrespondences between LSC's state planning team and various equaljustice stakeholders.In the current climate of scarce resources, LSC must remaincommitted to pursuing bold new approaches that foster effectivelegal assistance to low-income clients, including overhaulingservice areas adjudged to be insufficiently responsive to thetenets of State Planning. In an overwhelming majority of instances,LSC has used the competitive bidding process to forge deeper bondswith its grantees and stakeholders, allowing LSC to serve as anactive partner in planting the seeds of comprehensive, integratedstate justice communities nationwide. In fact, stakeholders indozens of states have embraced the new approach fully and reportedback enthusiastically on their progress since initiating their ownstate planning processes.LSC understands that organizations can be reluctant to embracemajor change. LSC also recognizes that opinions may differ as tothe most appropriate configuration of service areas, and thatgrantees and other stakeholders may have a better perspective onhow to best serve clients and enhance access in their states. Inrecognition of these tensions, LSC has worked diligently since 1995to convey the expectations of the State Planning Initiative and toestablish meaningful partnerships with stakeholders aimed atfostering a new symbiosis between the federal provider andrecipients of legal services funding. However, if an impasse isultimately reached in a particular state, it is critical that LSCmaintain its statutory right to decide the configuration of serviceareas in order to foster greater access and service for alleligible low-income clients.ENDNOTES1 Legal Services Corporation Act of 1974, as amended,  1004, 42U.S.C.  2996c. (2001) ("LSC Act of 1974"). 2 Id. at  1001, 42U.S.C.  2996. 3 Omnibus Consolidated Rescissions andAppropriations Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-134, 110 Stat. 1321(1996). These new LSC administrative provisions have beenincorporated into each LSC appropriation since 1996, subject tosome modifications made in the Departments of Commerce, Justice,and State, the Judiciary and Related Agencies Appropriations Act,1998, Pub. L. 105-119, 111 Stat. 2440 (1997). 4 Id. at  504. 5 Id.at  503. 6 Id. LSC's current Congressional FY01 appropriation is$329.3 million. Consolidated Appropria- tions Act, 2001 Pub. L. No.106-553, 114 Stat. 2762 (2000). 7 Strategic Directions 2000-2005,page 4, "Programmatic Strategies." 8 LSC Act of 1974 at 1007(a)(3), 42 U.S.C.  2996f(a)(3). 9 LSC's budget was $400million, its highest level ever, when the American BarAssociation's (ABA) legal needs study was concluded in 1994. Usinga variety of methodologies for estimating the unmet legal need ofthe poor, several states have since reached conclusions similar tothe ABA study, including Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,Indiana, Kentucky, Maryland, Massachusetts, Missouri, Nevada, NewYork, and Virginia. LSC asked for funding to conduct a new nationallegal needs study in its FY2001 budget request to Congress;however, no funds were allocated for that purpose. 10 The Committeesubsequently extended its deadline until September 12, 2001. 11 H.Rep. No. 139, 107th Cong., 1st Sess. (2001). 12 The reconfigurationstandards spelled out in this Special Report to Congressconsolidate informa- tion taken from the following previouslypublished LSC sources: Building State Justice Communi- ties: AState Planning Report from the Legal Services Corporation, April2001; Letter to NLADA, CLASP, and PAG, May 1999; Program Letter98-1; Program Letter 98-6; Program Letter 2000-1; and ProgramLetter 2001-7. Additionally, LSC's state planning team has issuednumerous other targeted field correspondences to individual states'stakeholders who have submitted configuration plans adjudgedinsufficiently responsive to the tenets of State Planning. 13 OnJuly 19, 2001, prior to Congress' request for this Report, LSCissued Program Letter 01-4 (LSC's Reconfiguration Review Process),which implemented a review mechanism by which designated stateplanning bodies may appeal LSC reconfiguration decisions. 14 LSCResolution #2001-008, "Resolution Establishing A Task Force ToStudy and Report on Configuration of Service Areas," June 30,2001.15 Twenty-seven years ago, our government made a pledge to helpensure that all persons have access to America's civil justicesystem by enacting legislation that created Legal ServicesCorporation. LSC has helped millions of low-income citizens solveimportant, sometimes life-threatening, civil legal problems.Despite the success of LSC and its many contributions to access tojustice for low-income Americans, its achievements are overshadowedby the fact that so many in our society continue to sufferinjustice and are unable to gain access to our system of justice.Until all members of our society are afforded that access, thispromise of our government will continue to be unfulfilled. LSC iscommitted to promoting a new vision of legal services that willachieve the goal of bringing legal services to those currentlydenied access to the justice system. 16 Program Letter 1995-1directed LSC recipients to develop plans to stretch scarce federaldollars in the most effective, efficient ways possible. The letteralso anticipated the passage of congressional restrictions on theactivities of LSC programs, prompting LSC to instruct its programsto forge deeper bonds with other stakeholders, including non-LSCfunded programs, state and local bar associations, IOLTAadministrators, the judiciary, and client groups. Program Letter1995-4 provided a general outline as to the issues and criteriathat the state planning process should address. Significantemphasis was placed on the integration of LSC-funded programs intostatewide legal services delivery systems and the seven centraltenets of state planning were identified. 17 Program Letter 1998-1,published on February 12, 1998, called upon all LSC recipients toanalyze any progress made toward the development of the legalservices model envisioned by state planners. Programs were toevaluate whether all programs were working cohesively to assurethat urgent clients needs were being addressed; whether sufficientcapacities for training and information-sharing existed; whetherprograms were moving forward on technology; and whether they werecollaborating to increase resources and develop new initiatives toexpand the scope of their services. Grantees were also asked toexamine whether the existing program configuration was conducive tothe most effective state delivery system. Grantees were asked toexamine their progress in each of the seven principal areas ofState Planning in a manner that included assessing the strengthsand weaknesses of the current approach, establishing goals tostrengthen and expand services to eligible clients, and determiningthe major steps yet to be taken and a timetable necessary toachieve those goals. LSC set a deadline of October 1, 1998, forsubmission of state planning reports. 18 Program Letter 1998-6,published on July 6, 1998, responded to recipient requests forguidance and additional information on what was expected in theirstate planning reports. It included "State Planning Considerations"designed to address requests for additional information regardingstatewide goals, capacities, and approaches recipients shouldconsider in their state planning processes. Program Letter 1998-6stated that the State Planning Initiative will provide informationto aid LSC in exercising its statutory responsibility to "insurethat grants and contracts are made so as to provide the mosteconomical and effective delivery of legal assistance to persons inboth urban and rural areas." 19 As part of the competitive biddingrequirement, Congress mandated that current and past LSC recipientsmay not "be given any preference in the competitive selectionprocess." Omnibus Consolidated Rescissions and Appropriations Actof 1996  503(e), Pub. L. No. 104-134, 110 Stat. 1321 (1996). 20LSC Act of 1974 at  1007(a)(3), 42 U.S.C.  2996f(a)(3). 21 If nodesignated state planning body has been recognized by LSC, thestate bar and state IOLTA administrators may avail themselves ofthe Review Process.17