United States General Accounting OfficeTestimonyGAOBefore the National Commission on the Public ServiceGAO-02-940TChairman Volcker and Members of the National Commission on thePublic Service:I am pleased to be here today to discuss the essential actionsthat the federal government needs to take in order to manage itsmost important asset-its people, or human capital. Anorganization's people define its culture, drive its performance,embody its knowledge base, and are the key to successful merger andtransformation efforts. As such, strategic human capital managementis the critical element to maximizing government's performance andassuring its accountability for the benefit of the Americanpeople.The early years of the 21st century are proving to be a periodof profound transition for our world, our country, and ourgovernment. This transition is being driven by a number of keytrends including: global interdependence; diverse, diffuse, andasymmetrical security threats; rapidly evolving science andtechnology; dramatic shifts in the age and composition of thepopulation; important quality of life issues; the changing natureof our economy; and evolving government structures and concepts.These trends present a range of challenges that have no boundaries.These trends also contribute to a huge, longer-range fiscal andbudgetary challenge facing the United States. Given these trendsand longrange fiscal challenges, the federal government needs toengage in a comprehensive review, reassessment, andreprioritization of what the government does, how it does business,and who does the government's business. We must re-examine a rangeof government policies, programs, and operations. The status quo issimply unacceptable. The long-range numbers do not add up. We mustre-examine the base, including our current human capital policiesand practices. This re-examination will in turn require federalagencies to transform their cultures and shift their overallorientation from:processes to results,stovepipes to matrixes,hierarchical to flatter and more horizontalstructures,an inward focus to an external (citizen, customer, andstakeholder) focus,management control to employee empowerment,reactive behavior to proactive approaches,avoiding new technologies to embracing and leveragingthem,hoarding knowledge to sharing knowledge,avoiding risk to managing risk, andprotecting turf to forming partnerships.Leading public organizations here in the United States andabroad have found that strategic human capital management must bethe centerpiece of any serious change management initiative andefforts to transform the cultures of government agencies.Unfortunately, as the Commission has made clear, the federalgovernment is not well positioned to make the neededtransformation. GAO designated strategic human capital managementas a governmentwide high-risk area in January 2001 because of along-standing lack of a consistent strategic approach tomarshaling, managing, and maintaining the human capital needed forgovernment to deliver on its promises.1 We reported then and stillfind today that serious human capital shortfalls are eroding thecapacity of many agencies, and threatening the ability of others,to economically, efficiently, and effectively perform theirmissions.2 The federal government's human capital weaknesses didnot emerge overnight and will not be quickly or easily addressed.The enormous human capital and other transformation challenges thatneed to be addressed to transform the Federal Bureau ofInvestigation (FBI) and create a successful Department of HomelandSecurity are instructive of the critical and difficult task ahead.3Committed, sustained, highly qualified, and inspired leadership,and persistent attention by all key parties will be essential iflasting changes are to be made and the challenges we face acrossthe federal government successfully addressed.Fortunately, we are now seeing increased attention to strategichuman capital management and a real and growing momentum for changeis now evident since we placed strategic human capital managementon our High-Risk list.In August 2001, President Bush placed human capital atthe top of his management agenda.U.S.General Accounting Office, High-Risk Series: An Update,GAO-01-263 (Washington, D.C.: January 2001).U.S.General Accounting Office, Performance and AccountabilitySeries-Major Management Challenges and Program Risks: AGovernmentwide Perspective, GAO-01-241 (Washington, D.C.: January2001). In addition, see the accompanying 21 reports (numberedGAO-01-242 through GAO-01-262) on specific agencies.U.S.General Accounting Office, Homeland Security: Proposalfor Cabinet Agency Has Merit, But Implementation Will be Pivotal toSuccess, GAO-02-886T (Washington, D.C.: June 25, 2002) and FBIReorganization: Initial Steps Encouraging but Broad TransformationNeeded, GAO-02-865T (Washington, D.C.: June 21, 2002).The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) is assessingagencies' progress in addressing their individual human capitalchallenges as part of its management scorecard and mid-point reviewprocess.As one of its many efforts to help agencies with theseissues, the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) released a humancapital scorecard last December to assist agencies in responding tothe OMB scorecard.Finally, Congress has underscored the consequences ofhuman capital weaknesses in federal agencies and pinpointedsolutions through the oversight process and a wide range ofhearings held over the last few years.123Therefore, the key question today is how do we best seize theopportunity and build on the current momentum? I have often notedthat the first step toward meeting the government's human capitalchallenges is for agency leaders to identify and make use of allthe appropriate administrative authorities available to them tomanage their people for results both effectively and equitably.Much of the authority agency leaders need to manage human capitalstrategically is already available under current laws andregulations. Agency leaders should not wait for comprehensive humancapital legislative reforms to happen. The use of these authoritiesoften needs to be undertaken as part of, and consistent with,proven change management practices. The second step is forpolicymakers to pursue incremental legislative reforms to giveagencies additional tools and flexibilities to hire, manage, andretain the human capital they need, particularly in criticaloccupations. Key provisions of legislative proposals underconsideration in Congress represent an important step to helpingagencies address their human capital management challenges. Many ofthe provisions contained in the bills are consistent withauthorities we have been urging for other federal agencies.4 Thethird step toward meeting the federal government's human capitalchallenges is for all interested parties to work together toidentify the kinds of comprehensive legislative reforms in thehuman capital area that should be enacted over time. These reformsshould place greater emphasis on knowledge, skills, and performancein connection with federal employment, promotion, and compensationdecisions, rather than on the passage of time, the rate ofinflation, or geographic location, as is often the case today.Shockingly, over 80U.S. General Accounting Office, Managing for Results: Buildingon the Momentum for Strategic Human Capital Reform, GAO-02-528T(Washington, D.C.: Mar. 18, 2002).Page 3 GAO-02-940TUsing Performance Management Systems toHelp Transform Agenciespercent of the cost associated with the annual increases infederal salaries is due to cost-of-living and locality payadjustment. This must change.Today, I will discuss three broad human capital reformopportunities that are instrumental to agency transformationefforts and that the Commission may want to consider as its workmoves forward. These broad opportunities include: first, aligningindividual and organizational performance; second and directlyrelated to that, implementing resultsoriented pay reform; andthird, sustaining agency transformation efforts. I will concludewith some comments on how we in GAO are playing a constructive rolein helping the government address its human capital challenges,including our efforts to "lead by example" in this criticallyimportant area.Leading organizations use their performance management systemsas a key tool for aligning institutional, unit, and employeeperformance; achieving results; accelerating change; managing theorganization on a day-to-day basis; and facilitating communicationthroughout the year so that discussions about individual andorganizational performance are integrated and ongoing.5 Performancemanagement systems in these leading organizations typically seek toachieve three key objectives. First, they strive to provide candidand constructive feedback to help individual employees maximizetheir potential in understanding and realizing the goals andobjectives of the agency. Second, they seek to provide managementwith the objective and fact-based information it needs to rewardtop performers. Third, performance management systems provide thenecessary information and documentation to deal with poorperformers. Most federal performance management systems fail toachieve these objectives. In addition, many federal agencies arejust beginning to recognize that their performance managementsystems can be strategic tools to achieve success. In my opinion,modernizing agency performance appraisal and management systems andlinking them to agency strategic plans and desired outcomes shouldbe a top priority.Results-oriented performance agreements are one mechanism in aperformance management system that creates a "line of sight"showing5U.S. General Accounting Office, Human Capital: Key PrinciplesFrom Nine Private Sector Organizations, GAO/GGD-00-28 (Washington,D.C.: Jan. 31, 2000).Page 4 GAO-02-940Thow individual employees can contribute to overallorganizational goals. 6 Agencies that effectively implement suchsystems must first align agency leaders' performance expectationswith organizational goals and then cascade performance expectationsto other organizational levels. These employees are then heldaccountable for their contributions to achieve desired results. Ourwork has shown that agencies have benefited from their use ofresults-oriented performance agreements for political and seniorcareer executives. The performance agreementsstrengthened alignment of results-oriented goals withdaily operations,fostered collaboration across organizationalboundaries,enhanced opportunities to discuss and routinely useperformance information to make program improvements,provided a results-oriented basis for individualaccountability, andmaintained continuity of program goals during leadershiptransitions.Governmentwide, agencies need to place increased emphasis onholding senior executives accountable for organizational goals. OPMamended regulations that change the way agencies evaluate themembers of the Senior Executive Service (SES). While agencies willneed to tailor their performance management systems to their uniqueorganizational requirements and climates, they nonetheless are to:hold executives accountable for results; appraise executiveperformance on those results balanced against other dimensions,including customer satisfaction and employee perspective; and usethose results as the basis for performance awards and otherpersonnel decisions. Agencies were to implement the new policiesfor the SES appraisal cycles that began in 2001.Ultimately, an effective performance management system must linkpay and incentive programs to individual knowledge, skills, andcontributions to achieving organizational results. The affect ofpoor performers on agencies' performance and morale can far exceedtheir small numbers. Still, while important, dealing with poorperformers is only part of the challenge; agencies need to createadditional incentives and rewards for valuable and high-performingemployees who represent the vast majority of the federal workforce.Congress and the administration have repeatedly expressed acommitment to more fully link resources to results. The Americanpeople expect and deserve this linkage as well. However, weU.S. General Accounting Office, Managing for Results: EmergingBenefits From Selected Agencies' Use of Performance Agreements,GAO-01-115 (Washington, D.C.: Oct. 30, 2000).Page 5 GAO-02-940Twill never achieve this linkage without modern and effectiveperformance management strategies. Additional information on theperformance management programs in use in agencies and the relativestrengths and weaknesses of those programs, along with bestpractice information, would prove very helpful as agencies seek tolink pay to individual knowledge, skills, and performance.Efforts to link federal pay to knowledge, skills, andperformance should be part of a broader effort to align resourcedecisions to results. As I noted, fostered in part by theGovernment Performance and Results Act (GPRA), there has been anincreasing interest within the executive branch and the Congress inlinking performance and results to resource allocation and otherdecisions. Consistent with that view, we need to continue effortsto shift agency accountability-with appropriate safeguards andoversight- to budgeted resources and results and away from otherinputs and processes. The work of the recently completed CommercialActivities Panel, which I had the privilege of chairing, isillustrative in this regard.7 One of the sourcing principlesadopted by the Panel was that the federal government's sourcingpolicy should avoid arbitrary full-time equivalent (FTE) or othernumerical goals. The principle is based on the unarguable pointthat the success of government programs should be measured by theresults achieved in terms of providing value to the taxpayer, notthe size of the in-house or contractor workforce. I believe thatthe Panel's principle should also apply to resource allocationgenerally. We need to continue- and even augment-efforts to shiftthe focus of management, resource allocation, and decisionmakingfrom inputs and process to a greater focus on results and outcomesand to provide management reasonable flexibility whileincorporating appropriate safeguards to prevent abuse. In thisregard, holding managers accountable for results based on aspecific dollar allocation versus FTE caps would be a major step inthe right direction.As youknow, I believe that a greater emphasis should be placed onknowledge, skills, and performance in connection with federalOriented Approach to employment promotion and compensationdecisions at all levels, ratherthan the passage of time, the rate ofinflation, or geographic location, as so often is the case today.In recent years, widespread concern has been7Commercial Activities Panel, Improving the Sourcing Decisions ofthe Government: Final Report (Washington, D.C.: April 2002).Page 6 GAO-02-940TEnsuring Leadership and Accountability forAgencies' Transformation Effortsexpressed about the methodology and results of the procedures todetermine the federal pay gap. These concerns are among the reasonsthat the pay gap has never been fully addressed. I believe thatcareful study is needed to develop more realistic and workablemethodologies and solutions to federal pay issues. Part of thatassessment should focus on options for moving away from acompensation system that contains governmentwide pay increases withlocality adjustments, and toward a system that is based to agreater degree on the knowledge, skills, and performance of theindividuals involved.I fully appreciate that much work may be needed before agencies'respective performance management systems are able to support amore direct link between pay and individual knowledge, skills, andperformance. OPM certainly has a continuing and vital role to playin connection with these issues. OPM's recently released whitepaper on federal pay provides a good foundation for theresults-oriented pay reform discussion that must now take place.8The greater use of "broadbanding" is one of the options thatdeserves to be discussed. In the short term, Congress may wish toexplore the benefits of (1) providing OPM with additionalflexibility that would enable it to grant governmentwide authorityfor all agencies (i.e., class exemptions) to use broadbanding forcertain critical occupations and/or (2) allowing agencies to applyto OPM (i.e., case exemptions) for broadbanding authority for theirspecific critical occupations. However, agencies should be requiredto demonstrate to OPM's satisfaction that they have modern,effective, and validated performance management systems before theyare allowed to use broadbanding.The nature and scope of the cultural transformation that needsto take place in many agencies across the federal government willtake years to accomplish-easily outrunning the tenures of mostpolitical appointees. At the same time, GAO's work over the years,most prominently in our High-Risk and Performance andAccountability Series, has amply documented that many agenciessuffer from a range of long-standing management challenges and alack of attention to basic stewardship responsibilities,8Office of Personnel Management, A White Paper: A Fresh Start forFederal Pay: The Case for Modernization (Washington, D.C.: April2002).Page 7 GAO-02-940Trequiring concerted action and sustained top-level attention ifthey are to be addressed.9One option for addressing the issues agencies face is to createa Chief Operating Officer (COO) position for selected agencies thatwould provide the sustained management attention essential foraddressing key stewardship responsibilities in an integrated mannerwhile helping to facilitate the transformation process within anagency.10 These long-term responsibilities are professional andnonpartisan in nature. They cover a range of "good government"responsibilities that are fundamental to effectively executing anyadministration's program agenda. Statutory COOs would differfrom-but hopefully complement-the roles often assumed by thecurrent Deputy Secretaries in assisting the Secretaries inexecuting the administration's policy and program agenda andachieving an agency's mission. The good government responsibilitiesthat could be led by a COO include:strategic planning,  organizationalalignment,core values stewardship,human capital strategy,performance management (aligning institutional, unit, andindividual measurement and reward systems to achieve overallorganizational goals),communications and information technologymanagement,financial management,acquisition management,risk management,knowledge management,matrix management, andchange management.9For example, see U.S. General Accounting Office, Energy Markets:Concerted Actions Needed by FERC to Confront Challenges That ImpedeEffective Oversight, GAO-02-656 (Washington, D.C.: June 14, 2002);HUD Management: Progress Made on Management Reforms, but ChallengesRemain, GAO-02-45 (Washington, D.C.: Oct. 31, 2001); MajorManagement Challenges and Program Risks: Department of Energy,GAO-01-246 (Washington, D.C.: January 2001); and Medicare: 21stCentury Challenges Prompt Fresh Thinking About Program'sAdministrative Structure, GAO/T-HEHS-00-108 (Washington, D.C.: May4, 2000).10See U.S. General Accounting Office, Architect of the Capitol:Management and Accountability Framework Needed to Lead and ExecuteChange, GAO-02-632T (Washington, D.C.: Apr. 17, 2002); andGAO-02-528T.While various models for structuring such a position could beused, one option would be to have a COO who is appointed, subjectto Senate confirmation, to a term of 5 to 7 years (generallyconsidered to be the minimum time needed for major changeinitiatives to provide meaningful and sustainable results). The COOshould be at an organizational level equivalent to the currentdeputies in major departments and agencies in order to help assurethe effectiveness of this position. A term appointment would helpto provide continuity that spans the tenure of the politicalleadership to ensure that long-term stewardship issues areaddressed and change management initiatives are successfullycompleted. The individual would be selected without regard topolitical affiliation based on (1) demonstrated leadership skillsin managing large and complex organizations, and (2) experienceachieving results in connection with a number of the aboveresponsibilities. To further clarify accountability, the COO couldbe subject to a clearly defined, results-oriented performancecontract with appropriate incentive, reward, and accountabilitymechanisms.If Congress and the executive branch decide to move forward withthe COO approach, it may make sense to use a pilot in a selectnumber of agencies using a value and risk-based approach. Forexample, an agency that is experiencing particularly significantchallenges in integrating disparate organizational cultures (suchas the proposed Department of Homeland Security) may be anespecially appropriate first phase candidate. Agencies engaged inmajor transformation efforts, like the FBI, the Internal RevenueService (IRS), and the National Aeronautics and SpaceAdministration (NASA) could also benefit from such an approach.Similarly, a "challenged agency''-one that has longstandingmanagement weaknesses and high-risk operations or functions, suchas the Department of Defense (DOD)-may also be a good first phasecandidate.11 The point would be for the Congress, executive branchleadership in OMB and OPM, agencies, and others to gain experiencewith the COO approach before deciding how and where it should beapplied across the government.More generally, we need to comprehensively examine opportunitiesfor better using the federal government's career SES leadership.This examination should focus on a number of issues that have beensuggestedU.S General Accounting Office, DOD Financial Management:Integrated Approach, Accountability, Transparency, and IncentivesAre Keys to Effective Reform, GAO-02-497T (Washington, D.C.: Mar.6, 2002).Page 9 GAO-02-940TGAO's Constructive Efforts to HelpAgencies Address Their Human Capital Challengesto strengthen the SES and thereby improve federal performanceand foster transformation efforts. These issues include, forexample, concerns over SES compensation and pay compression. Ibelieve that the issue of whether and how much to increase SES paymust be discussed within the context of how to make any payincreases variable and performance-based rather thanacross-the-board and fixed. We also must carefully examine thecomposition of the SES. It seems to me that, in general, currentmembers of the SES fill three broad roles: executive leadership,program management, and senior technical and specialists positions.We need to look at the implications that these differing roles havefor a range of issues, such as SES core competencies, performancestandards, recruitment sources, mobility, and training anddevelopment programs. We also need to look at whether the number oflevels within the SES (i.e. ES 1 through 6) are necessary andappropriate.As the federal government's leading accountability organization,we have made a concerted effort to identify and encourage theimplementation of human capital practices that improve theefficiency, effectiveness, and accountability of the federalgovernment. Over the last few years, we have issued numerousreports with practical recommendations on the steps individualagencies can take to address their specific human capitalchallenges.12 In addition, we have reported on governmentwidetrends and lessons learned by successful organizations.13 We alsounderstand that we have a responsibility to "lead by example" and"practice what we preach" in all key management areas, includingstrategic human capital management.12For example, see U.S. General Accounting Office, Human Capital:Practices That Empowered and Involved Employees, GAO-01-1070(Washington, D.C.: Sept. 14, 2001); Human Capital: The Role ofOmbudsmen in Dispute Resolution, GAO-01-466 (Washington, D.C.: Apr.13, 2001); Human Capital: A Self-Assessment Checklist for AgencyLeaders, GAO/OCG-00-14G (Washington, D.C.: September 2000); HumanCapital: Design, Implementation, and Evaluation of Training atSelected Agencies, GAO/T-GGD-00-131 (Washington, D.C.: May 18,2000); Human Capital: Using Incentives to Motivate and Reward HighPerformance, GAO/T-GGD-00-118 (Washington, D.C.: May 2, 2000); andManagement Reform: Elements of Successful Improvement Initiatives,GAO/T-GGD-00-26 (Washington, D.C.: Oct. 15, 1999).13U.S. General Accounting Office, Federal Employee Retirements:Expected Increase Over the Next 5 Years Illustrates Need forWorkforce Planning, GAO-01-509 (Washington, D.C.: Apr. 27, 2001);and Senior Executive Service: Retirement Trends Underscore theImportance of Succession Planning, GAO/GGD-00-113BR (Washington,D.C.: May 12, 2000).On March 15, 2002, we released A Model of Strategic HumanCapital Management, the latest in a series of tools designed toassist agency leaders in effectively managing their people.14 Ourmodel is designed to help agency leaders effectively lead andmanage their people and integrate human capital considerations intodaily decision making and the program results they seek to achieve.In so doing, the model highlights the importance of a sustainedcommitment by agency leaders to maximize the value of theiragencies' human capital and to manage related risks. Accordingly,it raises the bar for all of us-those in positions of leadership,federal managers, employees, unions, and human capital executivesand their teams.Consistent with OPM's and OMB's views, our model of strategichuman capital management embodies an approach that is fact-based,focused on strategic results, and incorporates merit principles andother national goals. As such, the model reflects two principlescentral to the human capital idea:People are assets whose value can be enhanced throughinvestment. As with any investment, the goal is to maximize valuewhile managing risk.An organization's human capital approaches should bedesigned, implemented, and assessed by the standard of how wellthey help the organization pursue its mission and achieve desiredresults or outcomes.The model highlights the kinds of thinking that agencies shouldapply, as well as some of the steps they can take, to make progressin managing human capital strategically. The concepts presented inthe model are arranged around eight critical success factors, whichare organized in pairs to correspond with four cornerstones ofeffective strategic human capital management. (See Fig. 1.)U.S. General Accounting Office, A Model of Strategic HumanCapital Management, GAO-02-373SP (Washington, D.C.: Mar. 15,2002).Page 11 GAO-02-940TFigure 1: Critical Success Factors Organized by Human CapitalCornerstones4 Human CapitalCornerstones 8 Critical Success FactorsAs I noted before, OPM and OMB also have developed tools thatare being used to assess human capital management efforts. Weprovided drafts of our human capital model to OPM and OMB for theirreview prior to publication to help ensure that the three effortsare conceptually consistent. We hope that the perspective andinformation provided in ourPage 12 GAO-02-940TGAO's Efforts to Lead by Examplemodel will help inform agencies' efforts to respond to theadministration's management initiatives, such as "getting to green"on OMB's management scorecard and using the tools developed by OPM.While we remain sensitive of the need to maintain our institutionalindependence, we are working constructively with OPM, OMB, andothers to explore opportunities to develop a more fully integratedset of guidance and tools for agencies to address their humancapital challenges.15In addition to providing tools to help agencies help themselves,we believe it is our responsibility to lead by example. We are inthe vanguard of the federal government's efforts to modernizeexisting human capital strategies and we are committed to stayingin this position. Our people are our most valuable asset and it isonly through their combined efforts that we can effectively serveour clients and our country. By managing our workforcestrategically and focusing on results, we are helping to maximizeour own performance and ensure our own accountability. By doing so,we also hope to demonstrate to other federal agencies that they canmake similar improvements in the way they manage their people.We have identified and made use of a variety of tools andflexibilities, some of which were made available to us through theGAO Personnel Act of 1980 and our 2000 legislation, but most ofwhich are available to federal agencies.The most prominent change in human capital management that weimplemented as a result of the GAO Personnel Act of 1980 was abroadbanded pay-for-performance system. The primary goal of thissystem is to base employee compensation primarily on the knowledge,skills, and performance of individual employees. It providesmanagers flexibility to assign employees in a manner that is moresuitable to multi-tasking and the full use of staff. Under ourcurrent broadbanded system, analyst and analyst-related staff inGrades 7 through 15 were placed in three bands. We expect to modifyour banded system in the future based on our experience todate.15U.S. General Accounting Office, Managing for Results: Next Stepsto Improve the Federal Government's Management and Performance,GAO-02-439T (Washington, D.C.: Feb. 15, 2002).Page 13 GAO-02-940TIn January 2002, we implemented a new competency-basedperformance management system that is intended to create a clearlinkage between employee performance and our strategic plan andcore values. It includes 12 competencies that our employeesoverwhelmingly validated as the keys to meaningful performance atGAO. (See Fig. 2.)Figure 2: GAO's Competency-Based ModelOur October 2000 legislation gave us additional tools to:realign our workforce in light of mission needs and overallbudgetary constraints; correct skills imbalances; and reducehigh-grade, managerial, or supervisory positions without reducingthe overall number of GAO employees. This legislation allowed us tocreate a technical and scientific career track at a compensationlevel consistent to the SES. It also allowed us to give greaterconsideration to performance and employee skills and knowledge inany Reduction-in-Force actions. We believe that other agenciescould benefit from these additional authorities.Since the legislation was enacted, we have established agencyregulations and conducted and completed our first offering ofvoluntary early retirement opportunities. Once employees registeredtheir interest in participating in the program, we considered anumber of factors including: employee knowledge, skills,performance, and competencies; the organizational unit or subunitin which an employee worked; an employee's occupational series,grade, or band level, as appropriate; and the geographic locationof the employee. As authorized by the 2000 legislation, employeeperformance was just one of many factors we considered whendeciding which employees would be allowed to receive theincentives. However, let me assure you, we did not use performanceto target certain individuals.We are also using many recruiting flexibilities that areavailable to most agencies, including an extensive campaign toincrease our competitiveness on college campuses and extendingoffers of employment during the fall semester to prospectiveemployees who will come on board the following spring and summer.We are also using our internship program in a strategic fashion andwe often offer permanent positions to GAO interns with at least 10weeks of highly successful work experience. Moreover, we arebuilding and maintaining a strong presence of both seniorexecutives and recent graduates on targeted college campuses. Wehave also taken steps to streamline and expedite our hiringprocess. In this regard, the current length of time that it takesto hire a person in most other federal agencies is much too longand must be addressed.Even after we hire good people, we need to take steps to retainthem. We have taken a number of steps to empower and invest in ouremployees. For example, we have active employee feedback andsuggestion programs. In addition, we are in the midst ofimplementing our first student loan repayment assistance programfor about 200 employees who have indicated interest and are willingto make a three-year commitment to staying with the agency.Overall, we have implemented the following initiatives andtargeted investments, some of which are relatively recent and someof which are longstanding:16Prepared a human capital profile and needs assessment tounderstand employee demographics and distribution.Conducted an employee survey in 1999 and 2002 tounderstand the status and progress of the agency and the areas inwhich we need to improve.Completed a knowledge and skills inventory for allemployees.Conducted an employee preference survey so that employeescould be given the opportunity to work in the areas that interestand energize them in light of our institutional needs.Implemented an Executive Candidate Development Program toprepare candidates for assignments in the SES.Initiated a Professional Development Program for newlyhired GAO analysts to help them transition and progress.Initiated a redesign of our training curriculum todirectly link and support our validated corecompetencies.Established an Employee Advisory Council to facilitateopen communication and direct input from line employees to theComptroller General and other GAO senior leadership.Provided an on-site child care center called "TinyFindings" and the Wellness and Fitness Center.Implemented additional employee-friendly benefits such asbusiness casual dress, flextime, and public transportationsubsidies.Used recruitment bonuses, retention allowances, andstudent loan repayment assistance to attract and retain employeeswith specialized skills.Implemented a new "state of the art" performanceappraisal system that is linked to our strategic plan and based onkey competencies.As we engage in these changes, we also know that we are notperfect and we never will be. This is a work-in-progress for us asit is for others. Our approaches are not the only way for agenciesto proceed, but they can help others identify ways to address theirindividual human capital challenges. In this regard, we have sharedour lessons and experiences with others, and are happy to doso.16 For more information on these efforts, see Human Capital:Taking Steps to Meet Current and Emerging Human Capital Challenges,GAO-01-965T (Washington, D.C.: July 17, 2001).Page 16 GAO-02-940TIn summary, Mr. Chairman, I believe that there is no moreimportant management reform than for agencies to transform theircultures to respond to the transition that is taking place in therole of government in the 21st century. Strategic human capitalmanagement must be at the center of this transformation effort. Weall need to seize the momentum that has recently emerged-agenciesmust use existing authorities to strategically manage their people;Congress needs to consider some statutory changes in the shortterm; and all interested parties need to work together towardenactment of more comprehensive civil service reform over time. Ilook forward to continuing to work with Congress, OPM, OMB,agencies, the National Commission on the Public Service, and otherinterested parties as we jointly seek to ensure that the federalgovernment modernizes its human capital strategies in order tomaximize performance, assure accountability, transform itself, andprepare for the future.Chairman Volcker and members of the Commission, this concludesmy statement. I would be pleased to respond to any questions thatyou may have.For further information regarding thisstatement, please contact J.Contact andChristopher Mihm, Director, Strategic Issues, on (202) 512-6806or atAcknowledgments mihmj@gao.gov. Individuals making keycontributions to this testimony included Amy Choi, Rebecka Derr,Judith Kordahl, Ellen Rubin, Lisa Shames, and Ed Stephenson.(450140)